“Trip-hop” eventually became a ’90s punchline, a music-press shorthand for “overhyped hotel lounge music.” But today, the much-maligned subgenre almost feels like a secret precedent. Listen to any of the canonical Bristol-scene albums of the mid-late ’90s, when the genre was starting to chafe against its boundaries, and you’d think the claustrophobic, anxious 21st century started a few years ahead of schedule. Looked at from the right angle, trip-hop is part of an unbroken chain that runs from the abrasion of ’80s post-punk to the ruminative pop-R&B-dance fusion of the moment. The best of it has aged far more gracefully (and forcefully) than anything recorded in the waning days of the record industry’s pre-filesharing monomania has any right to. Tricky rebelled against being attached at the hip to a scene he was already looking to shed and decamped for Jamaica to record a more aggressive, bristling-energy mutation of his style in ’96; the name Pre-Millennium Tension is the only obvious thing that tells you it’s two decades old rather than two weeks. And Portishead’s ’97 self-titled saw the stress-fractured voice of Beth Gibbons envisioning romance as codependent, mutually assured destruction while Geoff Barrow sunk into his RZA-noir beats like The Conversation’s Gene Hackman ruminating over his surveillance tapes. This was raw-nerved music, too single-minded and intense to carry an obvious timestamp. But Massive Attack were the origin point of the trip-hop movement they and their peers were striving to escape the orbit of, and they nearly tore themselves to shreds in the process. Instead— or maybe as a result—they laid down their going-nova genre's definitive paranoia statement with Mezzanine. The band's third album (not counting the Mad Professor-remixed No Protection) completes the last in a sort of de facto Bristol trilogy, where Tricky’s youthful iconoclasm and Portishead’s deep-focus emotional intensity set the scene for Massive Attack’s sense of near-suffocating dread. The album corroded their tendencies to make big-wheel hymnals of interconnected lives where hope and despair trade precedent—on Mezzanine, it’s alienation all the way down. There’s no safety from harm here, nothing you’ve got to be thankful for, nobody to take the force of the blow: what Mezzanine provides instead is a succession of parties and relationships and panopticons where the walls won’t stop closing in.The lyrics establish this atmosphere all on their own. Sex, in “Inertia Creeps,” is reduced to a meeting of “two undernourished egos, four rotating hips,” the focus of a failing relationship that's left its participants too numbed with their own routine dishonesty to break it off. The voice singing it—Massive Attack's cornerstone co-writer/producer Robert “3D” Del Naja—is raspy from exhaustion. “Dissolved Girl” reiterates this theme from the perspective of guest vocalist Sarah Jay Hawley (“Passion’s overrated anyway”). On “Risingson,” Grant “Daddy G” Marshall nails the boredom and anxiety of being stuck somewhere you can’t stand with someone you’re starting to feel the same way about (“Why you want to take me to this party and breathe/I’m dying to leave/Every time we grind you know we severed lines”). But Mezzanine’s defining moments come from guest vocalists who were famous long before Massive Attack even released their first album. Horace Andy was already a legend in reggae circles, but his collaborations with Massive Attack gave him a wider crossover exposure, and all three of his appearances on Mezzanine are homages or nods to songs he'd charted with in his early-’70s come-up. “Angel” is a loose rewrite of his 1973 single “You Are My Angel,” but it’s a fakeout after the first verse—originally a vision of beauty (“Come from way above/To bring me love”), transformed into an Old Testament avenger: “On the dark side/Neutralize every man in sight.” The parenthetically titled, album-closing reprise of “(Exchange)” is a ghostly invocation of Andy’s “See A Man's Face” cleverly disguised as a comedown track. And then there’s “Man Next Door,” the John Holt standard that Andy had previously recorded as “Quiet Place”—on Mezzanine, it sounds less like an overheard argument from the next apartment over and more like a close-quarters reckoning with violence heard through thin walls ready to break. It’s Andy at his emotionally nuanced and evocative best.The other outside vocalist was even more of a coup: Liz Fraser, the singer and songwriter of Cocteau Twins, lends her virtuoso soprano to three songs that feel like exorcisms of the personal strife accompanying her band’s breakup. Her voice serves as an ethereal counterpoint to speaker-rattling production around it. “Black Milk” contains the album’s most spiritually unnerving words (“Eat me/In the space/Within my heart/Love you for God/Love you for the Mother”), even as her lead and the elegiac beat make for some of its most beautiful sounds. She provides the wistful counterpoint to the night-shift alienation of “Group Four.” And then there's “Teardrop,” her finest moment on the album. Legend has it the song was briefly considered for Madonna; Andrew “Mushroom” Vowles sent the demo to her, but was overruled by Daddy G and 3D, who both wanted Fraser. Democracy thankfully worked this time around, as Fraser’s performance—recorded in part on the day she discovered that Jeff Buckley, who she’d had an estranged working relationship and friendship with, had drowned in Memphis’ Wolf River—was a heart-rending performance that gave Massive Attack their first (and so far only) UK Top 10 hit.Originally set for a late ’97 release, Mezzanine got pushed back four months because Del Naja refused to stop reworking the tracks, tearing them apart and rebuilding them until they’re so polished they gleam. It sure sounds like the product of bloody-knuckled labor, all that empty-space reverb and melted-together multitrack vocals and oppressive low-end. (The first sound you hear on the album, that lead-jointed bassline on “Angel,” is to subwoofers what “Planet Earth” is to high-def television.) But it also groans with the burden of creative conflict, a working process that created rifts between Del Naja and Vowles, who left shortly after Mezzanine dropped following nearly 15 years of collaboration.Mezzanine began the band’s relationship with producer Neil Davidge, who’d known Vowles dating back to the early ’90s and met the rest of the band after the completion of Protection. He picked a chaotic time to jump in, but Davidge and 3D forged a creative bond working through that pressure. Mezzanine was a document of unity, not fragmentation. Despite their rifts, they were a post-genre outfit, one that couldn’t separate dub from punk from hip-hop from R&B because the basslines all worked together and because classifications are for toe tags. All their acknowledged samples—including the joy-buzzer synths from Ultravox’s “Rockwrok” (“Inertia Creeps”), the opulent ache of Isaac Hayes’ celestial-soul take on “Our Day Will Come” (“Exchange”), Robert Smith’s nervous “tick tick tick” from the Cure’s “10:15 Saturday Night,” and the most concrete-crumbling throwdown of the Led Zep “Levee” break ever deployed (the latter two on “Man Next Door”)—were sourced from  1968 and 1978, well-traveled crate-digging territory. But what they build from that is its own beast.  Their working method never got any faster. The four-year gap between Protection and Mezzanine became a five-year gap until 2003’s 100th Window, then another seven years between that record and 2010’s Heligoland, plus another seven years and counting with no full-lengths to show for it. Not that they've been slacking: we've gotten a multimedia film/music collaboration with Adam Curtis, the respectable but underrated Ritual Spirit EP, and Del Naja’s notoriously rumored side gig as Banksy. (Hey, 3D does have a background in graffiti art.) But the ordeal of both recording and touring Mezzanine took its own toll. A late ’98 interview with Del Naja saw him optimistic about its reputation-shedding style: “I always said it was for the greater good of the fucking project because if this album was a bit different from the last two, the next one would be even freer to be whatever it wants to be.” But fatigue and restlessness rarely make for a productive mixture, and that same spark of tension which carried Mezzanine over the threshold proved unsustainable, not just for Massive Attack’s creativity but their continued existence.Still, it’s hard not to feel the album’s legacy resonating elsewhere—and not just in “Teardrop” becoming the cue for millions of TV viewers to brace themselves for Hugh Laurie’s cranky-genius-doctor schtick. Graft its tense feelings of nervy isolation and late-night melancholy onto two-step, and you’re partway to the blueprint for Plastician and Burial. You can hear flashes of that mournful romantic alienation in James Blake, the graceful, bass-riddled emotional abrasion in FKA twigs, the all-absorbing post-genre rock/soul ambitions in Young Fathers or Algiers. Mezzanine stands as an album built around echoes of the ’70s, wrestled through the immediacy of its creators' tumultuous late ’90s, and fearless enough that it still sounds like it belongs in whatever timeframe you're playing it.Eight years, five albums, and two EPs in, the New York-based outfit Krallice have long since shut up purists about their “hipster black metal.” Their four-man, post-structural assembly line runs at a breakneck pace, taking great care to balance the intricate (Colin Marston and Mick Barr’s interlocking riffs, Lev Weinstein’s head-spinning polyrhythms) with the incendiary (best exemplified by Barr and Nick McMaster’s shared, animalistic vocal duties; the former’s a screaming eagle, the latter a growling hellhound). The quartet frequently capitalize on the element of surprise; Krallice’s last two releases—2015’s Ygg Huur and last winter’s Hyperion EP—dropped spontaneously, a pair of inter-dimensional rifts masquerading as albums, far from the hum of the hype machine. Early last month, the band opened the portal once more to announce their sixth album Prelapsarian, subsequently released sans fanfare on the Winter Solstice. Upon first glance, Prelapsarian, which the band recorded last summer, may not seem like much. Comprising four tracks and thirty-five minutes, the LP stands just a smidge taller than its predecessor, and sports a similarly dense stylistic template. Fans familiar with the stop-go surges and antiphonal touches of old will undoubtedly appreciate “Transformation Chronicles,” “Conflagration”, and “Lotus Throne,” the album’s staggered, epic triad.Hyperion’s copious lyrical references to mythology, astrophysics, and nihilistic philosophy belied an obsession with the cosmic. Prelapsarian, by contrast, is the product of a band firmly planted on terra firma, racing against the doomsday clock. Post-election anxiety runs rampant, manifested in everything from the title (derived from the age of humanity’s primordial, Edenic innocence, the original “good old days” before Adam and Eve shared a snack and sealed humanity’s grim fate), to the razed-earth panoramas framing the doomy, eight-minute-long dirge “Conflagration.” “Hate Power,” is the the album’s highlight: an odd apex, considering it’s only the second track on the album, and clocking in at less than four minutes, the shortest. Krallice songs usually sprawl out across nine, eleven minutes; in these cramped confines, Barr and McMaster stage an epic battle for control as the band totters between d-beat and death metal. Without their usual song length as a cushion, the song feels like a fight to the death in a windowless room. As the song thrashes itself nearly apart, the doomsday-clock ticking desperation is palpable. In their growing catalog, this is a relatively crisp release, a speedy little roller coaster situated alongside the Towers of Terror. But the moment is dense and terrifying enough to make Krallice fans wonder: What could they accomplish with an album of compositions this compact? Minneapolis’ Uranium Club seem to revel in being aggressively obtuse. They sprung up last year with their Human Exploration EP, an eight-song tape of some of the most tightly-wound, gleefully mean, and well-constructed punk to grace the underground in a while. Human Exploration quickly became a must-have of the punk scene, receiving multiple vinyl pressings, all while the band rejected any web presence and most interviews as well.All of Them Naturals, their second EP, is Uranium Club indulging even more in such pranksterish qualities. The first two minutes of audio are pulled from the Nation of Ulysses handbook of sarcasm and myth-making, as a man with a vaguely British accent comments fictitiously on all the band has supposedly accomplished since its last record, from selling novelty pencils to distributing pamphlets for “pseudo-intellectual literature circles and swingers’ parties.” Uranium Club must know that people have been patiently waiting to hear more from them, and the final track of All of Them Naturals winkingly plays into that: it’s a 30-second “excerpt” of another unreleased song.In between, Uranium Club spits out some pretty damn catchy, no-frills punk rock. They have quickly garnered comparisons to Devo, particularly the twitchy neurosis of the early Q: Are We Not Men? A: We Are Devo! era. It’s not unwarranted. Both bands share an affinity for guitar riffs so soaked in treble they could cut ear drums, and for attempting to shove as many starts and stops into a song as possible. “God’s Chest” is the frantic centerpiece of this release, and maybe the most directly hooky thing the band has crafted; it even incorporates some haywire synths near the end, a first for the band.Not that Uranium Club’s reference points are strictly in the past. The sour intro of “Operation Pt.II” clearly evokes Tyvek and the lo-fi punk that the Detroit outfit has been cultivating for over a decade, as do the relentless jagged hits of “The Lottery.” Contemporaries like the Coneheads (and, to a lesser extent, the enigmatic Northwest Indiana punk scene as a whole) have been melding old school punk love to the modern trash punk aesthetic, and are also here in spirit.The real secret of Uranium Club, though, is how casually talented they are. Besides the ridiculous precision of their playing, the interplay of the guitars clearly takes some notes from Wipers; the music is decidedly crude, but it’s still played with a well-honed intensity that flares up again and again. The buzzsaw solo in the middle of “Opus,” or gradual buildup and release of tension on “That Clown’s Got a Gun,” wouldn’t hit nearly as hard if it weren’t performed so forcefully here. Every song relishes in a ragged intensity, but never for a moment feels as if it could spiral out of control or fall apart, a rarity for bands in this genre.Of course, Uranium Club has the perfect mask for their technical skills: lyrics marred by a sardonic sense of humor. “The Lottery” spins a relentless tale of someone turning into an absolute monster upon hitting the jackpot, throwing everyone from their son to their mom under the bus. “Who Made the Man?,” with its constant repetition of that platitude, drives ever-darker emphasis on the consequences of your actions, from success to murder. Uranium Club is a band unafraid to toss a line like “Will you please piss on my teddy bear?” into a song for the pure sake of disorientation. The band clearly wants to keep everyone on edge. If the Uranium Club is anything, it is at least very self-aware of exactly what it is doing.Kleenex began with a crash. It transpired one night not long after they’d formed, in Zurich of 1978, while the germinal punk group was onstage. They had but four tunes then—“Beri-Beri,” “Ain’t You,” “Heidi’s Head,” “Nice”—and at early gigs they would play them over and over to small but delighted crowds who did not want the noise to stop. When Kleenex’s original male guitarist didn’t care to continue on as such, the late Marlene Marder stepped up from the audience and swiftly found her place alongside bassist Klaudia Schifferle and drummer Lislot Ha. Marder—a literal post-punk; she delivered mail—was armed with a knowledge of two chords if not an awareness of pitch. “Lislot didn’t know that you can tune a drum kit,” Marder once said. “We played like this for a year, without tuned drum kits or a tuned bass or guitar. The guys were more ambitious so they didn’t want to play with us. For us, it was OK not because we said, ‘We’re the greatest!’ We just did as we could. Not serious in the beginning.”In all their chaos, those four songs were unusually taut. Kleenex made riotous music like a rubber band; it could tighten, or snap, or shoot in air. When some friends in the small Swiss punk scene released them as the Kleenex EP, word moved fast. The exuberant 45 made its way quickly to Britain, entering the orbit of John Peel as well as the Marxist intellectuals at the then-nascent Rough Trade label, beginning Kleenex’s affiliation with that bohemian London scene. “Ain’t You”—with its wiry riffs and chanted, pogoing hooks, its chic edge and abandon—fit well on Rough Trade’s 1980 Wanna Buy a Bridge? comp, alongside the scratchy Swell Maps and their similarly daring one-time tour mates, the Raincoats. First Songs collects Kleenex’s output from ’78 to 1982, preceding their first album (at which point they’d been forced by the tissue company to switch their perfect name—capturing the very Pop disposability of consumer culture—to LiLiPUT). The band’s lineup was constantly in flux; these songs also feature saxophonist Angie Barrack and vocalists Regula Sing and Chrigle Freund. The reissue’s title is clever; if these 24 tracks are all indeed songs, then Kleenex was reimagining what a song could be. The shortest one, the 69-second “1978,” for example, is a queasy interstitial propelled by unsparing riffs and amusingly primordial drumming. On “Eisiger Wind” (“Icy Wind”), the clangor and “OOO AHHH”s and “LA LA LA LA”s culminate with a nails-tough 15-second coda that brings to mind Mothers of Invention. But then, in Kleenex’s gleefully anarchic world, “song structures” seemed tedious.Their methods of composition were peculiar even for punk. One was extreme repetition, in which a song would progress by repeating a few minimal bars over and over, starting slowly and speeding up each time, as if running up a hill and then tumbling down it. The band punctuated their music with things like whistling and saxophones and kazoo sounds. Their guitar chords had a soured edge, and their lopsided call-and-response vocals alternately evoked stoic Patti Smith and a wayward school choir. Most crucial were the befuddlingly shredded human voices—grunted, exasperated, bloodcurdlingly shrieked, pitched so high as to pierce into the reddest red—which sounded more like a Yoko Ono Fluxus experiment than anything resembling pop. But the inquisitive core of Kleenex’s music stokes curiosity in a listener: From what plane of existence does that scream originate? Is that a person? Is that a recorder? What even is a nighttoad?The lyrics, sung in English and Swiss-German, veer between ominous images or deliberate nonsense. On “Die Matrosen” (“The Sailors”), the song’s jovial whistling is undermined by a narrative of a man in a pub who “had a blackout” and “lost control.” The combination of a grave voice with sugary ones on “Beri-Beri” skewers the lyric “and each day you feel nicer!” “Madness” is one of the most affecting Kleenex songs, with its alternately slammed and melancholy chords: “Hey madness you have touched me,” it goes, “Hey madness what do you want from me?” These emphatic early songs are fervent invocations, evidence that pure conviction could summon magic and newness from the wilderness within.The signature Kleenex songs fall together in ways that manage to approximate pop. The best one is “Hitch Hike.” “Girl was on the road to drive away/She had no money to pay the train,” goes the gummy, sing-song chorus. “Hitch hike ghost, don’t touch me/...Let me be.” Upbeat as “Hitch Hike” feels, it also touches on the necessary guardedness of being a woman in public, the adventure and risk of the female wanderer (it reminds me of Cindy Sherman’s 1979 Untitled Film Still #48). Defiant beyond its jingly form, it’s cut with the howls of a rape whistle. Not unlike their comrades in the Raincoats, Kleenex’s collective shouts were eruptions of joy as well as gestures of outsider solidarity.At the heart of Kleenex’s music is a radical sense of resourcefulness. It’s part of what helps them transcend their moment; indeed, many of the works of artier O.G. punk bands feel more potent today than those of their instigating major-label peers. Accordingly, the decimating screams of “Ü”—“EEEEEEEEEEEE”—are the point of punk (it’s worth noting that Greil Marcus put “Ü” on his influential Lipstick Traces compilation). Kleenex collaborated with Rough Trade’s early go-to production duo of Geoff Travis and Red Krayola’s Mayo Thompson on the “Ü”/“You” single, perhaps owing to its audacious and wildly electric ensemble feel. “You” explodes with democratic purpose: “This is your life/This is your day/It’s all for you.” With that, the influence of Kleenex on a punk scene like Olympia’s from the 1980s onward is palpable; Kurt Cobain included “anything by Kleenex” on his list of favorite albums, but Bikini Kill’s “Liar” or Girlpool’s “Jane” are primary sources for the legacy of Kleenex screams today. “Split” is the perfect storm of Kleenex’s bottle-rocket inventiveness. The lyrics go, “Hotch-potch, hugger-mugger, bow-wow, hara-kiri, hoo-poo, huzza, hicc-up, hum-drum, hexa-pod, hell-cat, helter-skelter, hop-scotch.” This dizzied, scissor-cut, full-throttle collage is undercut with spirited declarations that, “Yesterday was a party! Yesterday the drinks were strong!” and a crude siren of “woo! woo! woo! woo!”s. There is nothing cerebral; there is only pure jubilance, only action. “Split” doesn’t sound “sung” as much as it sounds like it’s bolting out of someone’s chest. Play “Split” alongside anything off Never Mind the Bollocks and see which sounds more lawless; Kleenex make Sex Pistols sound like alt-rock.“We didn't have songs like ‘Fuck the System’ like other bands had,” Marder once said. “We didn’t throw stones and smash windows. We stood there and played songs.” But an autonomous message persisted. For several months in 1980, violent youth riots turned Zurich into a “war zone,” sparked by “a paucity of funding and space for the alternative arts scene.” Kleenex responded viscerally to this unwelcoming world by creating their own.In 2017, the rollercoaster ride of punk remains replete with adrenaline and adventure and thrills, with semblances of danger and truth. But rollercoasters have tracks and belts and guards; they are always the same. Kleenex built a rollercoaster with loose bolts, not at all predictable, bravely betraying structure, careening. At its best, punk offers up a self-immolating blueprint that says, year after year, “the blueprint is yet to be written.” Kleenex’s raw rapture still lights up this idea. First Songs is a testament to the freedom in limitation, or rather, the limitless nature of freedom when logic is tossed aside. It is impossible to consider a given release by a footwork artist without confronting the long shadow cast by DJ Rashad’s catalog, particularly his magnum opus, Double Cup. The writing sessions for Double Cup started four years ago in San Francisco, after the producer Taso (Anastasios Ioannis Skalkos III) invited Rashad and DJ Spinn to the Bay Area. Taso appears four times on that album, and though it can be hard to discern an individual footwork producer’s idiosyncrasies, he leaves an indelible mark. He has a remarkable ability to smooth over the acidic edges that come with footwork’s inherent speed. This was especially true in the Double Cup’s introductory song “Feelin,” a revelatory musical moment that almost single handedly brought footwork to a larger audience. The three-man effort from Taso, Rashad, and Spinn was soulful and sensual, but also discombobulating in the way footwork often is. In other tracks like “Pass That Shit,” Taso helped break down the genre’s common barrier between dancefloor utility and home-listening. Overall, he was one of the architects of footwork mainstream jump, and he has returned with a solo effort, New Start, that extracts some of Double Cup’s best qualities.New Start opens much like Double Cup, with a collaboration between Taso, Rashad, and Spinn. On the album’s first song, “New Start,” there’s an immediate sense of warm familiarity. When these three producers worked together, they generated a sound that is both pulsating and comforting; perfect for both club speakers and paltry headphone listening. There was a pleasurable universality and malleability to the music they made together. On “AM Track,” the second of the trio’s collaborations on the album, they perfect the formula for smooth and soulful footwork found on Double Cup.Elsewhere, Taso works with other members of the Teklife crew, including DJ Earl, Gant-Man, Manny, and Taye. In all these collaborative works, he finds a way to locate and amplify the voice of another artist. For example, his track with Taye, “In the Green Room,” heightens Taye’s tendency towards a more hip-hop driven footwork by brightening it with elements of Miami bass. In “Da Capo Al Coda,” he is able to draw out the very best of Earl’s melancholic energy by slowing the beat way below 160 bpm, moving towards something closer to billowing ambient. Taso shows his individual voice just once on this album, in a track called “Murda Bass,” which surprisingly paints him a bit of a sentimentalist for vintage British dance music. He borrows freely from garage and UK bass, and it would be a stretch to call this track footwork. Here he showcases his versatility as a producer, able to accommodate and inhabit many styles at once.Oddly, some of the very best tracks on this album are in their own way slightly retrograde and stuck. They copy and fine-tune the aesthetic of Double Cup, and do little to break the mold. If anything, some of the most forward-thinking footwork of the moment is being made outside of Teklife (take for example Foodman’s intense experimentation). Still, New Start proves that the prowess of footwork’s first family is intact, and Taso might just be the glue that holds it all together.In the pilot episode of “Insecure,” the critically lauded HBO comedy series created by Issa Rae and Larry Wilmore, Rae’s eponymous character Issa is at a crossroads. She’s in a stable but stale relationship, and the occasion of her 29th birthday has her wondering if she’s wasting time on a romance that’s heading nowhere. Issa decides to take her best friend Molly, who’s also feeling unlucky in love after a streak of failed flings, to an open mic night in hopes of setting her up with someone new—but secretly to reconnect with an ex-boyfriend. Before long, egged on by said ex, Issa winds up on the stage rapping about “Broken Pussy,” a term that she coined to explain Molly’s recent poor run of form (“Maybe it’s really rough, maybe it’s had enough.”)The resulting cheesy freestyle, set to the tune of Kelis’ twinkly 2006 hit “Bossy,” makes the cut as the second song on Insecure (Music From the HBO Original Series). Its placement injects a welcome dose of Issa’s personality (both fictional and real—Rae wrote the song with Wilmore) into the soundtrack, while acting as the skeleton key to understanding the rest of the selection; back on the small screen, “Broken Pussy” costs Molly the attention of a potential love interest and leads to a big fight between the two, but they reconcile easily by the end of the episode. The show “Insecure” excels at tracing the professional and affective tribulations of young black adults in L.A., but it stands apart for its depiction of the unbreakable black female friendship at the heart of the story. Insecure (Music from the HBO Original Series) celebrates this dynamic with 16 songs: mostly by or about women, almost exclusively by black artists. Arkansas-native Kari Faux kicks things off with “No Small Talk,” an anthem for the self-possessed, recorded previously for her 2014 EP Laugh Now, Die Later. A ringing phone blends in with a hard-hitting drum pattern to buoy Faux’s cool-but-confident delivery, replete with nods to Pimp C and 2 Chainz: “Three cellphones and I still don’t ever text ‘em/Catch me out in public and you know I’m flexin’.” Faux makes another appearance on “Top Down” assisted by Brooklyn MC Leikeli47, whose cadence recalls that of fellow New Yorker Amil. The song, a bouncy electropop composition about riding around in a drop top feeling like a million bucks, was commissioned for the first season finale.Much of the soundtrack appeared across “Insecure”’s 8 episodes to date, curated by the show’s eminent musical consultant Solange Knowles, who knows a thing or two about elucidating the black female experience on wax to dazzling effect. The feel-good anthems give way to songs that address a range of romantic entanglements. “Girl,” a standout track from the Internet’s 2015 album Ego Death, is expertly reimagined as an electric-guitar-driven ode to the feminine by SoCal ensemble 1500 or Nothin. Guordan Banks switches between the high and low register over a slick bassline on “Keep You in Mind,” a call for moving past the coy stages of flirtation onto something more serious.Although Faux’s “Top Down” is the only original song on Insecure, the rest were chosen carefully to illuminate the main characters’ tastes and animate the world that they inhabit, situated for the most part in predominantly black South L.A. neighborhoods like Leimert Park and Baldwin Hills. This is achieved by featuring either the work of local artists, like the 1500 or the Internet themselves (“Just Sayin/I Tried”), or songs that evoke a similar sense of place, like the sunny strings of “Palm Trees” by D.C. rapper GoldLink.Considered independently from the influences of the show, the “Insecure” soundtrack works as a seamless collection of hip-hop, soul and R&B. The list of performers runs the gamut from established artists like D’Angelo (“Sugah Daddy”) and Thundercat (“Heartbreaks + Setbacks”) to emerging talents like TT the Artist (“Lavish”) and Banks, who claimed his first Billboard #1 with “Keep You in Mind” last summer. In recent months, the well-timed placement of a song in a new TV series has taken on renewed importance as a means for new artists to raise their profile. “Insecure” was already renewed for a second season and while the protagonists’ fate is surely the highest priority for fans, a chance to devour the forthcoming score can’t be too far behind.Rapper Simbi Ajikawo, who records as Little Simz, is by all measures on an upward trajectory, with comparisons to iconoclasts like Lauryn Hill and praise from craft-minded virtuosos like Kendrick Lamar (the latter said Simz “might be the illest doing it now.”) By last year’s A Curious Tale of Trials + Persons, she’d experienced enough fame to be ambivalent about it—“the type of music that ain’t never gonna sell,” she rapped on “Wings.” But sell it did, enough for Simz’s next album to feature notably well-curated guests (though not Lamar; that collaboration will probably be pretty great whenever it inevitably happens). All of which served to set her up nicely for her new album, which is…a concept album based on Alice in Wonderland.The reference to the children’s story is a metaphor, naturally—“It’s about situations I’m still trying to get my head around, and places where I’m still trying to figure out who to trust, or who not to trust,” Little Simz told Vice in late 2016. (The exact situations are a bit amorphous—in other interviews she’s suggested the music industry, or escaping into art, or escapism in general.) But the conceit is the biggest problem—there’s a limit to how many takes can be drawn from a book of Victorian math jokes and accompanying film of Disneyfied drugginess. Alice is also more suited to satire or farce—Carroll’s original idea—than serious subjects or earnest introspection, the two modes of this album. “LMPD,” the first track, features a conscious Chronixx verse on Bob Marley, Black Lives Matter, and pineal glands, followed by a birdsong-flecked interlude featuring a spacey, pitch-shifted Cheshire Cat that evokes, depending on how charitable one is, reggae or a spa. A point is being made here, but perhaps not the intended one.On Stillness in Wonderland, befitting the title, Simz eschews the vivid psychedelia of peers like Janelle Monáe in favor of a muted, atmospheric approach. There are a couple of overt references—a “white rabbit” clip recurs throughout, and “King of Hearts” takes advantage of Alice’s most confrontational character to let Simz take off heads with Chip (still atoning for his kiddie-grime past as Chipmunk) and Ghetts. But for the most part, the wonder is in the arrangements. Much of Stillness features gorgeous production; touchstones might be early Martina Topley-Bird or last year’s KING album.But Stillness in Wonderland comes off more as a sparsely edited mixtape than a self-contained album: heavy on atmosphere, light on songs. Simz is remarkably prolific—this is her 11th release—and the album often feels fragmentary: tracks have five ideas in the space where one should be, promising experiments are shoehorned into a concept that perhaps might not have been there. On “Picture Perfect,” she plays Wonderland MC over jaunty brass; if only there was more to say besides “Wonderland is amazing, ain’t it?” Unusually for such an introspective album, the guest spots are welcome respite.“Poison Ivy” is a standout, a duet with longterm collaborator Tilla about a toxic-yet-compelling relationship, personified in a distorted, prickly guitar line tried to build an alluring soul duet atop. On “Shotgun,” there’s a gossamer hook by the always-welcome Syd, and then there’s Bibi Bourelly’s Rihanna-polished swagger on “Bad to the Bone.” It’s probably not coincidental that these two tracks are both more polished, with a radio-pop sheen totally out of place with the proggier stuff, and contain relatively few Alice references; Simz’s grappling with fame may well be a holding pattern. “I don’t want to be an overnight sensation/I’m tryin’ to make a record you can’t stop playin’,” SiR says on “One in Rotation”; there’s some false dichotomy shit going on here, and then the track cuts off, abruptly, as if snapped out of a dream.For the last thirty years, Israel’s electronic music scene has operated in fits and starts. When India opened up their borders to Israeli passports in 1988, many youths who had finished their conscription services poured into the country and became entranced by Goa trance, bringing that rave aesthetic back home with them. But by 1997, police cracked down on bigger festivals, driving electronic music further underground. The last few years have seen an uptick in hotly tipped young Israeli producers such as Moscoman, Autarkic, Deep’a & Biri, and Red Axes (not to mention Moscoman’s always intriguing Disco Halal imprint). Of them all, Yotam Avni might be best positioned to crossover to larger festival crowds, as his resumé links him with the likes of Derrick May, Osunlade, and Terrence Parker. Avni knows every side of the industry, beginning as a music journalist before moving to party promoter (AVADON) as well as his own club, Resek. Across a handful of singles, the Tel Aviv-based producer has mined the trenches between tech, tribal and deep house, his tracks popping up on both Ben Klock and Âme & Dixon’s Essential Mix. Following up on this summer’s “Monad XXII,” this four-track EP (also on the Berlin-based Stroboscopic Artefacts imprint) continues to push him towards a sound at that’s more assured, though he continues to take risks to varying degrees of success.“Orma” strikes a plangent, ominous chord and quickening hi-hat pattern for the techno. Just when it seems like it might just plunge deeper into darkness, Avni introduces a saxophone skronk and lets it echo. Quick fillips of tom and an incessant beep are added, but despite the horn and the possibilities it suggests, the track never quite moves beyond its original components. “Shtok” features glimmering struck bell tones not unlike Pantha du Prince, which Avni then sullies with sweeps of white noise and a phantasmal wordless vocal, just balancing between beauty and menace.“Even” mixes the EP’s stoutest beat with the most elegant filigree of strings –both plucked and bowed—and piano. For the title track, Avni builds a rhythm of rattling gourds and thumped wood, harkening back to his tribal house productions. Before it goes down that route though, a men’s chorus enters, making the “Tehillim” (or “psalms”) of the title a literal reference. The first few times through, the combination of choir and drums feels more like a throwback to Enigma. But Avni unleashes squalls of feedback and noise that give the track some grit, so that a mix of the ancient and futuristic also has a bit of the messy present in it.Ambient music is a funny thing. As innocuous as it may seem on the surface, it can often be seen as an intrusion, an irritant. Muzak annoyed as many people as it mellowed, to the point where Ted Nugent tried to buy the company just to shutter it. When Brian Eno teamed with guitarist Robert Fripp (planting the seeds that would lead to his epochal Ambient series), the duo played a concert in Paris in May of 1975 that eschewed their Roxy Music and King Crimson fame and was subsequently met with catcalls, whistles, walkouts and a near-riot. Forty years later, Eno’s ambient works have drifted from misunderstood bane to canonical works. Eno’s long career has taken him from glam-rock demiurge to the upper stratospheres of stadium rock, from the gutters of no wave to the unclassifiable terrains of Another Green World, but every few years he gets pulled back into ambient’s creative orbit. And while last year’s entry The Ship suggested a new wrinkle, wherein Eno’s art songs inhabited and wandered the space of his ambient work like a viewer in an art gallery, Reflection retreats from that hybrid and more readily slots along works like the dreamlike Thursday Afternoon and 2012’s stately Lux.Like those aforementioned albums, Reflection is a generative piece. Eno approaches it less like an capital-A Artist, exerting his will and ego on the music, and more like a scientist conducting an experiment. He establishes a set of rules, puts a few variables into motion and then logs the results. Reflection opens with a brief melodic figure and slowly evolves from there over the course of one 54-minute piece. It’s not unlike the opening notes of Music for Airport’s “1/1,” with Robert Wyatt’s piano replaced by what might be a xylophone resonating from underwater. Each note acts like a pebble dropped into a pond, sending out ever widening ripples that slowly decay, but not before certain tones linger and swell until they more closely resemble drones. Listen closer and certain small frequencies emerge and flutter higher like down feathers in a draft.Around the 18-minute mark, one of those wafting frequencies increases in mass and the piece turns shrill for an instant before re-settling. Another brief blip occurs a half-hour in, like a siren on a distant horizon. Between these moments, the interplay of tones is sublime, reminiscent at times of famous jazz vibraphonist Bobby Hutcherson’s weightless solos, time-stretched until they seem to be emanating from the moon rather than the earth. As smooth and unperturbed as Eno’s ambient pieces tend to be, these small events feel seismic in scale, even if they are short-lived. Scale becomes the operative word for Reflection. While the physical editions of the album last just under an hour, Eno conceived of the piece to be the most realized version of his ambient music yet, one without parameters or end. Around 51 minutes in, the music starts to slowly recede from our ears, gradually returning to silence. But there’s a version of the piece for Apple TV and iOS that presents a visual component as well as a sonic version of Reflection that’s ever-changing and endless. As the lengthy press release the accompanied the album noted: “This music would unfold differently all the time–‘like sitting by a river’: it’s always the same river, but it’s always changing.” In this instance, reviewing the actual album feels like taking measure of that river from a ship window; you can sense more changes occurring just beyond its borders. Eno’s ambient albums have never seemed utilitarian in the way of many other ambient and new age works, but naming the album Reflection indicates that he sees this as a functional release, in some manner. Eno himself calls it an album that “seems to create a psychological space that encourages internal conversation.” It feels the most pensive of his ambient works, darker than Thursday Afternoon. Playing it back while on holiday, it seemed to add a bit more gray clouds to otherwise sunny days. Maybe that’s just an aftereffect of looking back on the previous calendar year and perceiving a great amount of darkness, or else looking forward to 2017 and feeling full of dread at what’s still to come.  There were innumerable cameos at the Bad Boy Family Reunion Tour, but as is often the case with nostalgia packages, “the inexorable march of time” stole the show. Shyne lip-synced “Bad Boyz” in exile from Belize. Lil’ Kim was as magnetic as ever, but tragically so, going blank during large portions of her past hits. While DMX and Ruff Ryders’ constant shirtlessness and bloody-knuckled Casio beats were a corrective to hip-hop’s sample-happy Shiny Suit era, with enough distance, they could all be lumped together as “late ’90s NYC rap.” And most bizarre of all were the once-estranged Lox screaming “if you glad that L-O-X is Ruff Ryders now!” during “Wild Out,” their first single after a nasty, public and possibly violent extrication from Bad Boy—referred to as “Rape'n U Records” on the subsequent We Are the Streets. Now signed to Roc Nation, the Lox are once again close to the locus of money, power and respect, affiliated with their third megastar-owned hip-hop conglomerate in as many albums. Their bizarre career is probably their biggest asset at this point and they have a hell of a story to tell. Filthy America...It’s Beautiful has little interest in telling it. No longer subject to the commercial expectations of their late-90s heyday, they should be able to talk directly to an audience for whom the first Lox album in nearly 17 years is “highly anticipated.” There’s enough time-stamped gossip in “What Else You Need to Know” to reward people who remember the narcissism of small differences fueling the D-Block and State Property beef and, yes, Sheek Louch utters the magic words “bring New York back.” More importantly, the voices and the wordplay of Styles P, Jadakiss, and Sheek have aged not one bit since 2000—no mean feat if you’ve tried to talk yourself into a recent Wu-Tang or DipSet project, or hell, just skip to Prodigy sounding like a wax figure of himself on “Hard Life.”Even within the narrow narrative structure on “What Else You Need to Know,” the chemistry between the trio is still a marvel. Jadakiss’ rasp remains one of hip-hop’s most indelible vocal instruments, a blank-faced menace even during the vast majority of Filthy America when he isn’t saying much of anything. Styles P’s wearied nihilism has naturally gotten more potent with age and as for Sheek...well, the bullish enthusiasm he shows for even his clumsiest rhymes is actually endearing at this point, providing an emotional immediacy to balance out his more reserved partners. He even knows he’s the third wheel—in fact, that’s exactly what he talks about on “What Else You Need to Know,” admitting he thought the “All About the Benjamins” beat was wack (they never had much of an ear for beats), weathering constructive criticism and chalking up his obvious exclusion from “Jenny from the Block” and “John Blaze” to knowing his role. You’d be hard pressed to find another example of a hardcore rapper taking an L with such dignity.All of this material would make for a fascinating interview on Hot 97, though it’s preceded by just that, the interminable “Stupid Questions” proving that the Lox are still the most tone deaf skit-makers in rap history. But because it’s a Lox track on a proper studio album, “What Else You Need to Know” is a reminder of the skill set separating great rappers from great songwriters. Like much of Filthy America, it’s saddled with an awkward hook and the kind of stainless steel, geographically non-specific, vaguely “futuristic” synth beats you typically hear from once commercially-viable rappers on the album after they’re no longer privy to A-list producers. Granted, Dame Grease and Pete Rock might be permanent A-listers to some, but their presence is only felt after reading the credits. And then there’s DJ Premier on the ironically titled “Move Forward.” If hearing Styles bitch about “mumbling rappers/DJs with the aux cord” still makes you want to pull irresponsible ATV tricks in celebration, it’ll be a pleasure to hear any Premo beat in 2016 because you know exactly what you’re getting. At the same time, you have to wonder what that’s worth when Premo’s 2016 output has been split between territorial flame-keepers like Royce 5'9 and remixes of Desiigner and Twenty One Pilots.The Lox are spared similar indignities here—Fetty Wap and Gucci Mane could churn out tracks like “The Agreement” and “Secure the Bag” ten times over in the span of a month and their appearances show the Lox have an interest in contemporary rappers without chasing contemporary trends. But maligned as they were for playing dress-up with both Bad Boy and Ruff Ryders—too grimy for the former, too conventional for the avant-Tunnel Banger phase of the latter—their commercial ambitions were the solution, not the problem. The Lox’s most beloved songs—“Money, Power and Respect,” “Wild Out,” “We Gonna Make It,” “Good Times”— provided state-of-the-art beats, ready-made hooks, and most importantly, direction for a group whose artistic zenith is probably a collection of radio freestyles.Otherwise, despite no longer being required to stuff a $17.99 compact disc to capacity, the Lox still have a way of making at least half of Filthy America feel like filler. They’re far more interesting characters than they let on: Styles P wrote a novel on his Blackberry and also opened a juice bar with Jadakiss. Surely the ins and outs of franchising would make for more interesting material than the “concept tracks” or production choices here, all of which seem designed to recall 1999 —“Hard Life” is Dame Grease blatantly Xeroxing “It’s Mine”; “Move Forward” is “Recognize Pt. II,” while “The Family,” “The Omen,” and the courtroom procedural “Filthy America” have precedents that can be easily identified by even casual rap consumers from the late ‘90s. But while both Styles and Jadakiss are capable of coming up with a scene-stealing guest verse or two every year—see: Schoolboy Q’s “Groovy Tony/Eddie Kane,” the “Ooouuu” remix—they know damn well that’s what keeps their career going at this point and they know better than to waste their best material here. The Lox have never lived up to their potential and they certainly aren’t going to start now.Lots of drone musicians have been called sound sculptors, but Harry Bertoia literally was one. The Italian-born American artist, who passed away in 1978 at age 63, remains well-known today as a sculptor and designer. In the last decade of his life, though, he also became a musician, pretty much by chance. While building large metal sculptures—mostly collections of tall rods standing upright on square bases—he discovered that they generated long, rich tones when struck. Enthralled by these sounds, he remodeled a barn in rural Pennsylvania to house over 90 of the pieces and began obsessively playing and recording them. A series of 11 privately-pressed LPs—released on Bertoia’s own Sonambient label—became highly sought-after among experimental music aficionados.Last year, John Brien of Massachusetts label Important Records collected all of Bertoia’s albums in a CD box set, and began combing through the unreleased recordings that Bertoia left behind. In keeping with the format of the original LPs, Brien’s first release on the relaunched Sonambient label, Clear Sounds/Perfetta, is titled after single, uninterrupted tracks that appear on each side. And just like the very first Bertoia LP—1970’s Bellissima Bellissima Bellissima / Nova—this new record features a performance by Harry Bertoia on Side A and one by his brother Oreste (who assisted Harry in much of his playing and recording) on Side B.The legend of the original Sonambient albums looms so large in sound-art circles that choosing their successor comes with some pressure. But Brien was up to the task, as Clear Sounds/Perfetta holds up well next to Bertoia’s previous releases, sharing their unique combination of tactile realism and otherworldly abstraction. Often the clanging and crashing of the metal is so tangible you can practically see Bertoia’s sculptures swaying and vibrating. But just as frequently, his massive sounds feel utterly removed from time and space—alien tones that have no real parallel in any music generated by conventional instruments.Bertoia’s work reaches a frightening pitch in “Clear Sounds,” a recording he made in June of 1973. Amid a wealth of high-end ringing, sounds emerge that could be repurposed for a horror film, including buzzsaw-like noise mirrored by cavernous echoes and distant gong-like rumbles. There is a terrifying moment at the 12-minute mark that must be the disembodied cries of tortured ghosts. Yet “Clear Sounds” is also imbued with a calm, meditative tone, which persists even through the piece’s loudest, most skin-raising stretches.Recorded in June of 1971, Oreste Bertoia’s contribution, “Perfetta,” is not as immediately striking or oddly intriguing as “Clear Sounds.” But Oreste’s style is busier and more tonally varied, and there’s much to be hypnotized by in his rippling static and quiet-to-loud drones. Whether you actually are hypnotized by this music or simply find it a neat sonic curiosity seems on the surface like an either/or question. But one of the attractions in Harry Bertoia’s work—and perhaps what makes it still sound so alive 40 years later—is that it's simultaneously a creative marvel and a captivating experience. Clear Sounds/Perfetta continues and extends that multi-layered effect, while stoking the fires of anticipation for what’s still to come from Bertoia’s archives.On 2006’s “That’s Life,” Killer Mike boasted “You’d be hard-pressed to find another rapper smart as me,” opening up about Cornel West and Michael Eric Dyson, poverty, respectability politics, and civil rights, before taking on both Bush Administrations (“George Bush don’t like blacks … and his daddy CIA had flooded the hood with rock”). A few months later, El-P was waging war with the same enemy in the 9/11 conspiracy theory thriller “Run the Numbers,” concluding that “it always comes back to a Bush.” The two songs sounded very little alike, but the music (and the rappers) shared a similar fire and presence: confident, conspiratorial, no-holds-barred, and razor-sharp. Neither were likely to be deemed “political” rappers then, but both were already dissenters and nonconformists; independent artists signed to themselves, free thinkers shooting off at the mouth. Nearly a decade after airing out the Bush family, the duo, as Run the Jewels, have found a creative renaissance. The group’s latest self-titled album, Run the Jewels 3, is a well timed, finely tuned rap epic that confronts the ruling class (here addressed as “the masters”) with deadly precision; it’s rap as resistance.With a demagogue waiting in the wings to assume the presidency, their particular Molotov mix of explosive shit-talking and unfiltered insubordination feels vital.Their interplay is instinctual this time around; the songs move and shuffle with its MCs intuitively trading bars, filling the gaps in each others’ phrases, and feeding off each others’ energies, using their booming voices to cut through the startling noises of a future dystopia. “Poor folk love us the rich hate our faces/We talk too loud, won't remain in our places,” El-P raps on “Everybody Stay Calm.” They’re both observers who refuse to sugarcoat. “I just try my best, man, to say something about the shit I see,” Killer Mike told The New Republic in 2015. “Because I don’t want to go crazy. I don’t want to be walking around angry and feeling rage.” To that end, RTJ3 isn’t a response or reaction, it’s a preemptive strike, laying the groundwork for the battleground ahead. Their methods remain consistent, but the stakes have been raised over the years. RTJ1 was a fun experiment; RTJ2 was a classicist statement, and now RTJ3 is a reckoning. Many of these songs have more urgency than before; If RTJ2 was the music of protest, then this is the music of revolt. In that way, RTJ3 is essentially the Run the Jewels manifesto, an outpouring of rage and defiance that is never overcome by the moment and never loses sight of the objectives: rallying the troops, holding everyone accountable (from lawmakers, to other rappers, to Don Lemon and themselves), and toppling oppression wherever it may reign (on “Thieves! (Screamed the Ghost),” El-P raps, “Fear’s been law for so long rage feels like therapy”). “Thursday in the Danger Room” peers into the duo's personal turmoil and their shared history, and on “2100” Killer Mike lays out their President-Trump survival strategy: “You defeat the devil when you hold onto hope.” The key to RTJ3 is closer “A Report to the Shareholders,” which is plainspoken about the duo’s message and intent: “Maybe that’s why me and Mike get along / Not from the same part of town, but we both hear the same sound coming / And it sounds like war.” Seconds later, Killer Mike goes full Malcolm X: “Choose the lesser of the evil people, and the devil still gon’ win / It could all be over tomorrow, kill our masters and start again.” This is the ire of a group that’s tired of saying I told you so.This is by far the best produced record of their trilogy, with beats that find new and interesting ways to wreak havoc. “Call Ticketron” turns automated ticketing technology into a beacon for alien transmissions. On “Hey Kids (Bumaye)” crackling static and thumping bass crater open to reveal whirring, wobbling tones and ghostly whispers, and Danny Brown slots in an exceptional guest verse. On “Panther Like a Panther (Miracle Mix),” furnished by the shouts of Miami rap goddess Trina, rounded blips mimic the patter of hand drums before bursting into a wave of buzzing, distorted noise that slowly dissipates back into nothing. They’re still clearly having fun doing this and it’s still fun to listen to them work.It isn’t quite as punchy as RTJ2, which was brutish in its tactics, with nonstop bangs and thrills, but RTJ3 is a triumph in its own right that somehow celebrates the success of a seemingly unlikely friendship and mourns the collapse of a nation all at once. “Thieves! (Screamed the Ghost),” a song about riots as a response to violence as opposed to a means to create it, samples an iconic Martin Luther King, Jr. quote from the 1967 speech “The Other America”: “A riot is the language of the unheard.” In keeping with that idea, RTJ3 is a soundtrack for the riots to come.“Why so sad?/Don’t feel so bad/Get out of bed,” Steven Warwick tunelessly sings over gutted synths and a plodding drum machine on “Get It Together,” the bleak ode to something resembling self-care that introduces Nadir. This half-hearted plea offers quite the starting point: climbing, out of absolute necessity and with little fanfare, from a very low place. The UK-born, Berlin-based Warwick has performed with Luke Younger (aka Helm) in the duo Birds of Delay and, more recently, solo as Heatsick; his output under that moniker offered wry, danceable commentary on the niche social realities of the creative class. This mixtape-like offering is his fourth full-length with PAN, but his first under his own name, and marks a shift away from sardonic needling into something that’s more acutely—and personally—an artifact of total precarity. Balancing a fatigued observational poetics with ambient synth sketches, Nadir strings together a series of uncomfortably crisp images of a parched present.As Heatsick, Warwick composed and performed using a beat-up Casio keyboard and a drum machine. While his productions weren’t exactly rich in sound, they tended to reach beyond those limited means, deploying skittering rhythms and juxtaposing textures to complex effect. Here, he gives up on this resourceful streak and embraces austerity. Sounds are bluntly placed, without much in the way of effects to dull their sharp corners: A harsh synth patch on “CTFO” maintains a single, flat volume throughout, running head-on into Warwick’s passive baritone. “Low Ceiling” matches a grating beat with the sound of helicopters overhead: “I feel scared/So I took a pill/And it calms me down,” he narrates. More ambient-minded offerings like “Racetrack Playa” and “Canyon Shadow” rumble aimlessly, streaked with staticky, trembling synthesizers. These still stretches are among the most evocative moments on the release, like the wordless reprieve of looking out a window while you’re in transit.This threadbare aesthetic is propelled by Warwick’s writing. His accounts of panic attacks or souring relationships are indistinctly one-size-fits-most, if occasionally a little repugnant in their sheer passivity. But his descriptions of place are particularly lucid, as on “The Mezzanine,” in which he looks into a new urban shopping plaza: “There’s a zone of near serenity,” he says. “Sometimes you catch the gaze of a passing onlooker. You scan the purchases of an innocent bystander. The mezzanine is your dance floor. It’s your chessboard.”A visual component to the album exists on Dutch artist Harm van den Dorpel’s delinear.info platform, comprising a nonlinear sequence of lyrics, cellphone videos, and photographs taken by Warwick between Berlin, Los Angeles, and New York, the three locations where Nadir was recorded. This colors in the transient spatial logic and general sense of dislocation that permeate these songs: an image of a desert sunset or a touching abstract photo of a beach at low tide will be layered with an iPhone picture taken in a shopping center or a German fast-food restaurant.Though it can be beautiful in a stark, sad way, there is little comforting in Nadir’s millennial abjection. Many of the most effective recent attempts to process our troubled socio-political moment in sound have presented some form of escape, or at least catharsis. But these compositions contain neither, and don’t attempt to synthesize a broader narrative. They function instead—like the images Warwick has assembled to accompany them—as snapshot-documents of impermanent locations, of experiences that don’t quite add up, of the bizarre conditions of urban life in 2016. The uneven emotional and social landscapes Warwick conjures feel honest, and woefully relatable, in their inability to resolve.In January 2016, rapper/actor Yasiin Bey announced his departure from entertainment. “I’m retiring from the music recording industry as it is currently assembled today—and also from Hollywood, effective immediately,” the artist proclaimed. “I’m releasing my final album this year, and that’s that.” In the 10-minute clip, posted to Kanye West’s personal website, Bey—formerly known as Mos Def—sounded weary, yet resolute. He was being detained in South Africa after trying to leave the country on a World Passport. Bey had been living in Cape Town since 2013, seemingly content with a low-key existence away from the spotlight.Over the years, the rapper has been responsible for some of underground hip-hop's most resonant music. 1998’s Mos Def and Talib Kweli Are Black Star, with friend and fellow Brooklyn lyricist Talib Kweli, is a widely heralded classic, and a year later Bey released Black on Both Sides, a remarkably nuanced LP full of introspective soul. Bey’s sophomore album—The New Danger, released five years later to the day in 2004—marked a drastic shift from the relaxed aura of his first record. With beats by producer Minnesota and contributions from his rock band, Black Jack Johnson, Bey opted for an edgy rock sound that occasionally missed the mark. But if nothing else, at least he sounded inspired, like he actually gave a shit about the art he’s releasing. After 2006’s True Magic, another dud released to fulfill Bey’s contract at Geffen Records, he rebounded on 2009’s The Ecstatic, a flurry of repurposed beats by Stones Throw affiliates.December 99th, Bey’s new album with producer Ferrari Sheppard, is by far the worst thing he’s ever released. I’m not just talking music; I mean this is the saddest thing—album, commercial, or film—with which Bey’s been associated. There’s nothing even remotely redeeming here, and it makes me wonder how long the rapper was awake before he wrote and recorded this material. For its 31 minutes, Bey sleepwalks through every track, mumbling nonsensical flows that never connect at all. And when he’s not doing that, he whistles through these instrumentals—like a poor man’s Negan here to terrorize Rick Grimes. Instead of a finished project, December 99th feels like a demo that listeners should never hear. These are the lines you fumble through while you think of better lines to write. On “Local Time,” the message is noble enough, but the rapper’s lethargic drone makes it tough to digest for a discernible extent: “We experience tests today/Above all, we are blessed today/Same as every day/In a special way.” Bey built his career on these sorts of affirmations, but they land with a thud on December 99th. It’s as if the rapper no longer believes his own words, or he’s tired of hearing himself say them.The only bright spots come from Sheppard’s soundtrack, but even those are few. “Tall Sleeves” boasts dark, smoldering synths that emit a sultry vibe. Tracks “Special Dedication” and “Heri” feel lush and aerated, giving Bey evocative canvases on which to create. But for the remainder, especially on “Blade in the Pocket,” “Seaside Panic Room” and “Shadow in the Dark,” the music sounds underdeveloped, exposing Bey's disengaged, flat mumbling in the harshest possible light. While Bey and Sheppard share the blame for this debacle, December 99th is ultimately a bigger strike against the rapper’s legacy. For an artist who once uplifted the masses, it seems he needs someone to do the same for him. Maybe he’s leaving at the right time.Don’t take your eyes off Pete Rock. The early-‘90s albums he produced with rapper CL Smooth still live in legend; recent reports suggest the New York duo are reuniting for their first new music since Nas dropped Illmatic. This pair, like their contemporaries A Tribe Called Quest, weren’t about to go back into the studio just because fans wanted them to. Rock may be the golden-age god whose snap-n-crack boom bap helped spawn J Dilla, Mark Ronson, and Kanye West, but take a look at the names that make up Rock’s recent client list—Torae, Grafh, Snyp Life—and it’s clear that he’s less interested in collecting checks than he is crowding his orbit with hard-nosed hip-hop.On Don’t Smoke Rock—Rock’s first full-length collaboration since 2011’s Monumental with Smif-N-Wessun—his anointed partner is Smoke DZA. Their album plays like a wintertime drive through Harlem in a Bentley with black-tinted windows, and they swerve together with pure confidence. It especially suits DZA; a prolific working MC with blunted flow and to-the-point storytelling skills, he has struggled to distinguish himself in the crowded world of NYC street rap revivalists. Though he might not possess the crackling lyrical loops of Action Bronson, the bitter wordplay of Ka, or the flashy sheen of brothers Westside Gunn and Conway, the Harlemite’s throwback cadences are a solid foil for the uptown cool of Rock’s crisp soul samples and tough drums.On “Wild 100s,” the producer takes the kind of double bass that Brian Wilson once harnessed in his pop symphonies, and he compresses them into a tense, energetic rap beat. “Hold the Drums” deletes all percussion; Rock instead fills the soundscapes with an angelic piano and voice sample on top of some skilled record scratches, as DZA wistfully nods to the past (“Mama had me rockin’ bucket hats when I was a year old”). His boasts can sound off-the-shelf (“Hop on a joint with me, it’s manslaughter,” he spits on “Wild 100s”), but his flow has charm and anchors Rock’s instrumentals. “Show Off” is the kind of New York anthem Jay Z sketched out on The Blueprint, and the peppy horns of “Dusk 2 Dusk” reimagines uptown as an off-the-billboard utopia.The project is bolstered by some well-deployed guest spots, too. Cam’ron delivers one of his strongest verses in years on the drug tale “Moving Weight Pt. I,” a scene straight out of a David Simon TV drama. Spotting cops on the corner, Cam considers the possibility he may need to blast his way out of trouble. He feels for his pistol and rubs the bulletproof vest under his cardigan, pausing to deliver some tongue-twisting surrealism (“Bad bitches in the tub, tell ‘em they all luck-ay/Grab me a condom, gave her the rubber duck-ay”). Rick Ross seems an unlikely pick for Rock’s natty stylings, but his husky voice isn’t its usual wrecking ball on the opulent strings of “Black Superhero Car.” And while Jadakiss and Styles P have a spotty history on other people’s tracks, they’re effective on the bitter ballad “Milestone,” slipping into the role of two salty veterans sadly surveying the past.This year, Tribe made an album that was grandiose, politically engaged, haunted by loss, and one of the year’s finest. But Pete Rock and Smoke DZA have forged something we still need, too: a great, modest New York rap album of concrete beats and blood-in-your-mouth bars. We await the reunion with CL Smooth with interest.Soul Jazz’s Punk 45 series has made it its mission to chart the forgotten corners of punk rock, one seven-inch record at a time, training its magnifying glass on the obscure groups or regional scenes that familiar histories overlook. In particular, its more localized iterations suggest that how punk sounded depended very much on where its seeds fell. A Los Angeles installment turned up the decadent nihilism of the Germs and the snotty proto-hardcore of the Middle Class, while last year’s Akron, Ohio disc focused on the likes of Devo and the Rubber City Rebels, freak prophets of a curdled futurism that echoed industrial America’s decline. Now, Les Punks takes Punk 45 back across the Atlantic to chart what happened when punk landed in mainland Europe.Punk rock was born in New York and London, but France provided much of the genre’s intellectual and aesthetic grounding. Les Punks’ sleeve notes trace punk’s currents back to a number of sources in France’s rich countercultural history: to writers like Rimbaud and Voltaire, the vanguard art movements of Dada and surrealism, the erotic provocations of Serge Gainsbourg, and the leftist sedition of chief Situationist Guy Debord, whose Society of the Spectacle provided intellectual ballast for the student riots of 1968, and from there found its way to the Sex Pistols via manager Malcolm McLaren and designer Jamie Reid. Unquestionably too, the French have always had an ear for the cool shit. Les Punks also spotlights the role of figures like Paris-based Marc Zermati, whose label Skydog fostered early links with New York and London scenes, and even released a seminal punk-before-punk document in the shape of Iggy and the Stooges’ chaotic live album Metallic KO.But in 1976, France had no pioneering rock‘n’roll tradition of its own, and a fair bit of Les Punks veers towards the imitative. The French groups clearly adored the dandyish side of New York punk—and man, did they dig Iggy. Angel Face’s “Wolf City Blues” is pure Stooges yowl and growl, with lashings of Ron Asheton-style wah-wah, while Fantomes’ cover of “I Wanna Be Your Dog” is too straight—a slavish, puppy-dog take on the original rather than a rabid leg-humper in its own right. Meanwhile, Dogs’ “Here Comes My Baby” and a couple of singles by Marie Et Les Garçons ably channel the more rocking NYC groups—the New York Dolls, Johnny Thunders and the Heartbreakers, the Modern Lovers—with lots of enthusiasm but not much in the way of innovation.Elsewhere, though, there’s evidence of young French groups carving out a distinctive local sound. Perhaps the quintessential French punk group is Métal Urbain, who made the bold move of swapping out live bass and drums for a synthesizer and drum machine. 1977’s “Paris Maquis” —which holds the honor of being the very first single ever to be released on Rough Trade Records—is a blast of caustic guitar and teeth-grinding rhythm box clatter that set a blueprint for future synth-punk groups (notably, Steve Albini’s Big Black). Unlike many of their peers, Métal Urbain sang in French—“So the Americans can’t understand us,” they told Search and Destroy in 1977. But even without much of a grasp of the language, you can get the gist of “Paris Maquis,” a tribute to the French Resistance fighters of World War 2: “La ville resiste terroriste… Fasciste!” Indeed, there’s an argument to be made that French punk was post-punk at its inception—modish, intellectual, already finding ways to rewire punk’s familiar formulas. Charles De Goal, the solo project of one Patrick Blaine, contributes “Dance Le Labyrinthe,” an early example of the emergent cold wave sound powered by clip-clopping drum machines, spasms of electronic noise and vocals pitched at the brink of hysteria. “Mind,” by Nancy duo KaS Product, is turbulent electro-punk with a bravura performance from vocalist Mona Soyoc. Its take on mental instability and stifling social conformity may have been inspired by synth player Spatsz’s day job as a psychiatric nurse. And there’s a curiosity in the shape of the torrid, sexual “Sally,” by Gazoline—a band fronted by one Alain Kan, an androgynous, outwardly queer artist and addict who performed alongside Gainsbourg at the Alcazar Club before turning to punk rock. An enigma, he was last seen in 1990, taking a ride on the Paris Metro. His fate is unknown.It’s worth giving another shout to Les Punks’ sleeve notes, a fat 50 pages of essays and interviews that supply precious context, plus extensive illustration from Bazooka—a “graphic commando” cell of radical French illustrators who, if you believe the rumors, boasted ties to the Baader-Meinhof gang. Track for track, there are compilations that cover French punk and post-punk with a better hit rate. The two volumes of Born Bad’s Des Jeunes Gens Mödernes lean further into the France’s homegrown coldwave and synthwave sound, and are better for it. But a snapshot of French punk’s first flush, Les Punks stands up. It’s the sort of time capsule that’s not quite ready to become a museum piece: loud and arrogant and ready to create a spectacle.It’s safe to say there is no other band on the planet quite like Senyawa. What do you call the music of this Indonesian duo: folk? Doom metal? Unplugged minimalist noise improv? In fact, it is a little bit of each. Wukir Suryadi plays the bambuwukir, an instrument of his own design—an amplified zither, fashioned out of bamboo, that looks like it could double as a weapon. It does the work of many instruments, and from it he ekes bowed string passages, plucked and strummed guitar-like sounds, and even woody, percussive rhythms. He has long hair and an intense mien, and onstage, he looks like a metal guitarist coaxing spirits from an alien relic rescued from a shipwreck.As for Rully Shabara—how best to describe what Shabara does? You couldn’t call him a “singer,” exactly. He never simply sings. He incarnates the fleshy essence of the human voice: He shrieks, he ululates, he jibbers. Sometimes, he dips down to a low, throaty growl, its texture as pronounced as the clicking of a dial; in his falsetto range, he is a bird of prey honing in on a small mammal. He lies somewhere on a spectrum connecting Diamanda Galás and Mayhem’s Attila Csihar.Brønshøj (Puncak), the follow-up to last year’s Menjadi, is darker and more abstracted than that album. In place of melody or rhythm, see-sawing drones and scraped textures predominate. The record is the product of an intense session held in a basement studio in Copenhagen’s working-class Brønshøj neighborhood. The duo would agree on themes—cues like “old shed,” “McDonald’s,” or “forest,” although none are necessarily discernible from the music itself—and then commence playing. Suryadi ran his bambuwukir through a short chain of cheap guitar pedals, including a looping device; Shabara used an old-school Shure 55SH Series II—the “Elvis microphone”—and the mixer’s built-in reverb and echo effects. For two days, the duo jammed, cooked Indonesian food in the kitchen next to the studio, smoked, and jammed some more. Beyond the vinyl master, there was no post-production. The album’s five songs reflect their genesis: They are slow, drawn out, and meditative, and they admit little daylight. (“Puncak” means “summit” in Indonesian, but the music feels more like a series of plateaus than peaks.) “Brønshøj 1”—all five of the album’s tracks bear simple, sequential titles—is a kind of invocation. In an approximation of Tibetan throat singing, Shabara explores the lowest, gravelliest reaches of his voice, as though caressing his larynx with a scouring pad, while Suryadi bows funereal drones. It sounds a lot like an acoustic cousin of Sunn O)))’s blackened doom, and the closing “Brønshøj 5” continues in a similar vein, applying fuzz-pedal distortion to Suryadi’s guitar-like leads as Shabara paces in slow, teasing circles around the root note. Continuing in the avant-metal vein, the short “Brønshøj 3” takes a few strands of similar material and simply runs the tape in reverse; it wouldn't sound out of place as an interstitial sketch on a Blut Aus Nord album.In its pursuit of a singular mood, the record is slightly less dynamic than Menjadi or the duo’s self-titled 2010 album, but the album’s two longest tracks offer a fuller indication of the duo’s range. On “Brønshøj 2,” Suryadi loops a glowering pedal tone and twists the tuning peg on a second string as he plucks it, creating an eerie, undulating effect; Shabara largely hangs back, laying down a smoky backdrop behind Suryadi’s high-necked riffing, which suggests the liquid glint of lap steel. “Brønshøj 4” combines bowed melodic phrases with a looped rhythm reminiscent of thumb piano; it is the album’s lightest track, melancholy yet also comforting. Toward the climax of its 11-minute run, as silvery string loops begin to burn white-hot, Shabara finally lets loose with a succession of inhuman shrieks and growls, lightly augmented by delay. He sounds like a synthesizer; he sounds like a pterodactyl. Yet, despite the obvious, formidable power of his voice, he never feels the need to fully unleash it; he sticks to the sidelines, directing his voice away from the listener. It reminds me of something Shabara did when the duo played Krakow’s Unsound festival this fall. At the end of a song, he stepped away from the microphone and unleashed a brief operatic run, which went soaring over our heads. Even unamplified, he dominated the cavernous hall. This short, intimate album functions in similar ways. Rather than attempting to bowl you over, Brønshøj instead invites you to lean in closer, and rewards handsomely when you do. When Chance the Rapper performed “Sunday Candy” with Jamila Woods and Nico Segal at the National Christmas Tree Lighting Ceremony, there was something distinctly special, and spiritual, about it: A prodigious and cheery “mixtape rapper” singing modern psalms and praises on the national stage at the behest of the first black President of the United States in his last days; the convergence of a God Dream and the American Dream. It felt like something to soak in and savor, to get nourishment from—both because of its almost absurdly uplifting energy and because it was something we might never see again, on any count. Chance seemed to linger in the moment, as if recognizing and relishing its significance; for many, next Christmas will feel much different, and this ceremony will probably look different, too. Next Christmas will be a white Christmas.The sentiment echoed weeks later on “Saturday Night Live” when Chance and Kenan Thompson performed a sketch called “Jingle Barack,” its politics laid plain in its lyrics: “It’s the last Christmas with Barack still here,” the foreshadowing clear, the successor’s agenda unspoken. Both Chicago natives, Chance first met Obama when he was 8 years old, his father a staffer for the POTUS during his Senate years. It isn’t too much of a stretch to suggest that Chance’s songs can often embody the hope Obama campaigned on—sources of inspiration for those coloring outside the lines, and also, to paraphrase Kanye, those who are colored and deemed out of line. Perhaps it’s only a coincidence that Chance is coming into his own as a lightning rod and leader as Obama departs, but it isn’t a coincidence that he identified this Christmas as a necessary time for healing.As if realizing the magnitude of the moment, or just never one to miss an opportunity to be merry, Chance and fellow Chicagoan Jeremih surprise released a holiday marvel called Merry Christmas Lil’ Mama, a Christmas album for the final yuletide of the Obama administration: one last bastion of hope in an uncertain and fraught time; a sonic snow globe where unflinching altruism, glee, and love (both neighborly and sensual) rule; a priceless gift celebrating the season of giving.And it isn’t just for President Obama—or for Lil’ Mama—it’s for all of us, too. It’s functional Christmas music that’s somehow also music for any function, set at Christmas. Where holiday tunes are typically hokey, decidedly old-fashioned, and predictable, Merry Christmas Lil’ Mama is actively (and perhaps instinctively) animated and stimulating, not satisfied with just conveying the spirit of the season but breathing life into it; it’s warm, natural, and even familiar in spots. This is the rare Christmas album that breaks from convention without defying tradition, using A Christmas Story snippets, a “Carol of the Bells” rework, and an “I’ll Be Home for Christmas” interpolation as blueprints to create the most refreshing festive songs in recent memory. But more than anything, it’s frolicsome and jolly, in keeping with the theme. The album captures Christmastime joy with juke, and jive, and the Jackson 5. About three minutes in, Hannibal Buress asks for Travis Scott effects on his vocals, and he gets them. There’s something for everyone.Over nine songs that sound like they were as fun to make as they are to listen to, Chance and Jeremih move in intervals and in tandem, complementing each other and operating in sync without losing their distinct voices. Chance’s path is mostly a righteous one (“The Pontius Pilates judge my bundle of joys/I know my bronze is gorgeous/Know who the birthday boy is”), and Jeremih’s a naughty one (“Know you cold, let’s bundle up/I’m just tryna get some love”), but they frequently find the overlaps or trade roles, as on “Snowed In” and “Joy.” In Jeremih’s capable hands, holiday staples become innuendos: sleighs and slays, hos, silent nights and unwrappings, sliding down chimneys, etc. Chance can turn a club into a nativity scene. Together they are an unstoppable force of good will and glad tidings wrapped in radiant melodies and scat raps. Merry Christmas Lil’ Mama scans Chance’s acid rap, steppers R&B, robotic soul, the gospel lite of Coloring Book, and Teklife juke and footwork seamlessly, adding streaking string arrangements, distorted Auto-Tune vocals, choirs, standout Zaytoven keyboard fills, and production from DJs Spinn and Gantman. They enlists help from rappers Lud Foe, King Louie, and Noname (who delivers another show-stopping verse on “The Tragedy” with raps like “Our heathenous appetite, ever and after/Like Christmas will save us and bathe us in rapture”). The songs are sincere and unpretentious, and are encapsulated by a single Jeremih lyric: “Your presence is a present for me/For Christmas or just because.”The album crescendos into “I Shoulda Left You,” a lively anthem for anyone looking to ditch toxicity in the godforsaken year that was 2016. “Rest in peace to great David Bowie/Please can we get back Prince?” Chance pleads in a half whine before beaming brightly, stifling laughter; there’s still fun to be had. The song serves as a larger metaphor for progress and optimism, avoiding stagnation, and cutting off unhealthy relationships. Its cheer feeds its mentality, seemingly suggesting better days ahead. A few minutes earlier, on “Joy,” Jeremih insinuates that we must create that brighter future ourselves. “They tend to forget about love,” he sings. “Let’s get right back to the joy.” And in these moments, where everything is snug and safe, it seems possible—probable even. On Merry Christmas Lil’ Mama, Christmas is restorative. No matter what, hope endures.It’s not easy for drummers to get the spotlight, especially if they’re the non-singing kind—no matter how prodigiously talented they may be. For every Ahmir “Questlove” Johnson (the Roots) or Damon Che (Don Caballero), there are hundreds of anonymous men and women who pound the back beat while their bandmates take center stage. After years of playing back-up to others, including many in the Leaving and Brainfeeder label nexuses (and, curiously, accompanying Wordpress founder Matthew Mullenweg in his senior recital as a jazz major), drummer Jamire William’ establishes his voice on solo debut ///// Effectual, a surprisingly satisfying record composed almost entirely of his own drumming.///// Effectual isn’t the first time Williams has put himself out front. Previously he lead the jazz/hiphop/rock band ERiMAJ, who released one more or less overlooked record in 2012; though he was a principal songwriter, he was also just a member and not the group’s singer. But on ///// Effectual, Williams strips away the instruments and melodies, leaving behind only his percussion, both live and looped, all the while posing a direct question about what exactly classifies as a “song.”Williams adorns a handful of his tracks with melodic accoutrements but ten of ///// Effectual’s fifteen cuts are just in-your-face drum hits. ///// Effectual begins with a sharp, two-handed snare snap on “WHO WILL STAND?” that summons the aforementioned Questlove and his opening to the Root’s “The Seed (2.0).” The similarity is striking, but Williams’ version is a stoned, hazily recorded drummer-on-his-own practice session that gives way to open space instead of a tight rhythm and blues. It’s remarkable how such a short snippet of sound can leave such an imprint, but it sets the stage for ///// Effectual in an odd and effective way.What most distinguishes Williams’ tracks is a strangely hypnotic and claustrophobic quality , made more striking by the fuzzy recording quality. The fluid compositions sometimes evoke classic solo performances like Max Roach’s “The Drum Also Waltzes” or Tony Williams’ “Echo” stretched out and explored. “Selectric,” with its thudding, dystopic programmed drums, sounds like 21st-century version of Billy Cobham’s “Anxiety,” while the uncharacteristically tight “[ Selah ]”—featuring extra percussion by producer Carlos Niño—gives “Funky Drummer” a run for its money.An even better reference point for ///// Effectual might be Antonio Sanchez’s magnificent 2014 soundtrack to the film Birdman. There, drums were similarly arranged around musique concrete samples, conjuring an entrancing, insular world that can simultaneously propel or make crazy anyone who dares listen for too long. The skittering pitter-patter of the hi hat on “Illuminations” mirrors Sanchez’s “Almost Human,” and the slow snare brushes of “wash me over (Pollock’s Pulse)” could just have easily been swapped into Birdman with the subtitle “(Keaton’s pulse).” Yet despite the success of Williams’ solo performances, the album’s numbers featuring additional instrumentation (from other musicians) are without doubt the album’s most listenable. GB (aka Gifted & Blessed) contributes to three of them, the most compelling of which is “TRUTH REMAINS CONSTANT,” which marries an anxious tom thump and cymbal crash rhythm with an airy Oberheim synthesizer. The result recalls pastoral bedroom IDM like Boards of Canada’s “Everything You Do is a Balloon” or cLOUDDEAD’s “(Cloud Dead Number Five) (1)”. Eventually Williams’ drums disappear and the synths are left to rise, giving the sensation that you’re in a hot air balloon about the disappear into the clouds.Better still are the album’s deliciously paced two closing moments: “collaborate With God,” featuring French composer and Frank Ocean collaborator Chassol and its subsequent remix by Miguel Atwood-Ferguson, provider of strings for Niño and others in the Brainfeeder/Leaving headspace. Of the two, the Chassol-only version is preferable, remaining a Jamire Williams track in feel. The latter, while excellent, is dominated by the Atwood-Ferguson strings and shifts the backdrop to something more like moody spy music. On ///// Effectual, Williams shows himself to be both an inspired composer and tasteful crafter of sound. He can build whole worlds worth spending time in with nothing but drum hits. But, as the fuller tracks suggest, he might  make something even deeper and richer if he allowed even one or two more primary colors into the frame. ///// Effectual provides a powerful blueprint to build on. For over a decade now, The-Dream has demonstrated a keen emotional intelligence, a willingness to throw his heart on the table, and an uncanny understanding of the female psyche—all while coming through with dozens of brilliantly dummy sing-along choruses made for belting and drunk dancing. As a songwriter/producer/singer, he’s breathed melody into his own songs as well as hits by Beyoncé, Rihanna, and Kanye West, adding humor and grace to their superstar personas. With his finest work—think “Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)” or “Fancy”—it can feel like he went to the mountaintop, met the god of song, and returned with a message.But he’s never been able to truly take off as a solo artist; after scoring a few minor hits with his first couple of albums, his own work has been met with an increasing indifference by the masses across the last six years. His latest EP, Love You to Death, won’t do much to change that. It’s just as layered and melodic as ever, but unless a more adventurous quiet storm DJ latches onto it, it won’t make it out of bedrooms. Which is where some of it belongs. Over a squiggly flute on “Madness,” a musically adventurous booty call, he rivals the raunchiest of rappers: “I would die to put my lips on it/I would love to rub my face in it/But you just gotta rub my face in it.”But blunt literalism isn’t his most powerful gift. He’s such a master of songwriting that he can play with language, lodging not just a phrase in your ear, but even abstract baby talk—think the “ellas” and “ehs” on Rihanna’s “Umbrella,” which he co-wrote. Similarly, Love You to Death opener “Lemon Lean,” the most obviously catchy song here, has no chorus other than some high-pitched cooing, but it’ll run like ticker tape through your head for days.Along with lust, The-Dream is always drowning in desire or regret, wrenching emotions that live very close to each other in the heart. And suffer he does on Love You to Death. “Daddy told me good pussy could kill ya,” he memorably laments on “Rih-Flex,” a clever ode to Rihanna. “I forgot about them things you did in college/Can you forget about them things I did last night?” he asks on “College Daze,” in a subtle nod to “Be Careful” by Sparkle and one of his clear inspirations, R. Kelly. Like Kellz or Jill Scott, The-Dream taps into the real grit of relationships by using ’round-the-way colloquialisms (“Now I don’t wanna just buy you shit… girl I wonder how lit you get”), yet he also has no problem elevating language and extending metaphors, either, alluding to a relationship teetering on the brink of failure in “Ferris Wheel.”By his own admission, The-Dream is less blessed as a singer than a songwriter and a producer, but that calling-card falsetto sounds crystalline here, and his note intervals are precise, shimmery, and sweet. The disappointments in this moody, make-up babymaker of an EP, then, have more to do with its tone. None of the songs trot along on his signature bright chords, and the closest he comes to going faster is at the very end (but if you’re using the EP as intended, well, perhaps it’s paced perfectly). While lush as ever, the songs never quite catch the “ghost”—that ineffable, humbling streak of god in songs that reduce you to tears—like “Fancy,” “Rockin’ That Shit,” “Yamaha,” and others did. Still, he has captured greatness more often than nearly any other modern-day triple threat, and that alone should make you scream his name.The Bay Area metal lifers who comprise Worm Ouroboros are individually responsible for some of the heaviest music in the underground, but together they take a subtler, slower approach. Equally akin to ’80s acts like This Mortal Coil or Cocteau Twins as their contemporaries on the Profound Lore imprint, Worm Ouroboros inhabit a ghostly, gothy atmosphere. Since debuting in 2007, they have competently inverted the traditional structure of doom metal and post-rock (unrelentingly heavy albums with ambient interludes), making music that glides patiently and quietly, exploding only when the tension can no longer be contained.Like Come the Thaw, their excellent 2012 album and first with Agalloch/VHOL drummer Aesop Dekker, their follow-up What Graceless Dawn is only six tracks long, though it spans over an hour. Tellingly, it takes Worm Ouroboros 15 minutes into the album and halfway through the second track, “Broken Movements,” before they unleash the full force of their sound. Until then, it’s mostly whispered vocals over Jessica Way’s chilly guitars and Lorraine Rath’s slithering basslines, with Dekker’s artful drumming knocking eerily against the walls. When “Broken Movements” reaches its climax, they all converge into a thunderous roar. Rath and Way wrap their vocals around each other like a string section, soaring over Way’s crushing riffs; together their voices form the guiding light of the album. But while Worm Ouroboros have never sounded more powerful as a three-piece, these type of crescendos are not the focus. The most crushing peaks instead come from its softer moments, like the heartbreaking coda to “(Was It) The Cruelest Thing” or the haunting intro of “Ribbon of Shadow.” Throughout the record, the trio maintains a consistent, earthy mood, occasionally playing off one another with the intuition of an improv group. It pushes Warm Ouroboros to new heights. Way’s guitar can reverberate with a lonely, Lost Highway howl and sparkle with a metallic shimmer, often lending the album its texture; Rath’s bass playing serves as its melodic foundation. Dekker, meanwhile, eschews his typical assault with a more dynamic palette. His slow patter in the midsection of “Suffering Tree” gives it the feeling of an apocalyptic Christmas carol, while his dramatic, double bass drum rolls in “(Was It) The Cruelest Thing” provide a late-album burst of adrenaline.While each of the album’s songs take a similar route through their 10-minute runtimes, Worm Ouroboros layer their music with enough nuances to keep things from getting too dense. As indicated by their band name, which is derived from the title of a cultishly beloved 20th century sci-fi novel, Worm Ouroboros have a literary flair. It’s inherent to their deeply poetic lyrics (“Weighing our worth in sacks of black earth/Filling our hearts and our graves with their sum”) and by the whispered passages of William Blake that open and close the album. Blake’s poems also give the record its bookending track titles, “Day” and “Night,” suggesting that What Graceless Dawn thematically covers a 24-hour span. This might be true (particularly if the span of your day mostly involves staring awestruck at a blackening sky, contemplating mortality with a lingering sense of dread). But Worm Ouroboros’ power feels mysterious and eternal: In just an hour, they conjure up an entire lifetime of darkness.Nine Inch Nails mastermind Trent Reznor has spent decades griping about the music business, dating back to his complaints about TVT in 1992 and his resulting “secret recording sessions” of the Broken EP. Now in some ways, he is the music business, a power player whose pioneering moves—surprise releases, extreme secrecy, fanbase cultivation, big budget commercial soundtrack jobs—have become global-pop-star S.O.P. So when he boldly introduces his surprise new EP Not the Actual Events as “an unfriendly, fairly impenetrable record that we needed to make” there is some cause for both intrigue and healthy skepticism. For longtime followers of Reznor, a few scenarios suggest themselves. Maybe he's hoping to stoke enthusiasm for a slight, 21-minute EP that mainly serves as a promotional tool for a trove of concurrent reissues. Maybe he thinks he's done something remarkable, because he still sees himself as an innovator, even though his output since reforming NIN in 2005 has been well-textured but either comfortably formulaic (With Teeth, Hesitation Marks, The Slip's first half) or uncomfortably ambitious (Ghosts I-IV, the second half of The Slip, parts of Year Zero). Optimists and diehards might wish for a third option: Maybe he's legitimately produced powerful and fresh music under the Nine Inch Nails banner. To Reznor’s credit and detriment, he's managed to touch on each scenario. There are only a handful of examples in Reznor’s post-millennial NIN output where the group have departed from their turbulent, sturm-und-drang industrialism. There’s the piano and Vocoder-driven disco barnburner “All The Love In the World,” opener to the otherwise-toothless With Teeth; the gloomy, overlong and under-baked instrumentals-only closet-cleaner Ghosts I-IV; and on 2013’s Hesitation Marks, the baffling, sunny “Everything,” a rare major-key tune in the band’s catalog. The more interesting of these, “All the Love in the World” and “Everything,” are the opposite of “unfriendly” or “impenetrable”—their disarming warmth is what makes them memorable. Nine Inch Nails have spent nearly thirty years trading on a signature type of abrasive, parents-repelling industrial melancholia—they’ve provided decades’ worth of precedent in this style, and it would be it pretty damned difficult to release anything that could notably set itself apart on these terms. The band’s most “impenetrable” release so far is Ghosts, which demonstrates how that word can frequently mean “boring.”Despite its rough-edges production, Not the Actual Events is neither unfriendly nor is it inaccessible, especially for fans. It does, however, deliver a kind of visceral fury that NIN hasn’t recreated since its mid-’90s Downward Spiral heyday. “Burning Bright (Field on Fire)” begins with a detuned, overdrive-saturated guitar riff reminiscent of My Bloody Valentine rather than the crunchy, sharp riffs of standard NIN before erupting into a swarm of shimmering guitars that give the synesthesiastic effect of being inside the field aflame. The song doesn’t necessarily go anywhere, but its crude, unhinged force feels vital. On “Branches/Bones,” the band stays truer to their post-2005 form. A textbook post-Fragile NIN single, it follows in the efficient and winning form of The Slip’s “1,000,000” and “Discipline” or the Nirvana-meets-NIN 2009 single “Not So Pretty Now,” tracks that show Reznor as a biting pop songwriter rather than a brooding noisemaker. However, his decisions to wedge in a chorus of “It’s like I’ve been here before!” and cut the proceedings off abruptly after less than two minutes feel perverse, suggesting a desire to tease what’s worked in the past but deny the full-on pleasure of nostalgia. Unfortunately, the album’s other three tracks don’t bring enough new ideas or fun to justify that denial. The burbling synth number “Dear World,” goes nowhere and says little, while cacophonous album centerpiece “She’s Gone Away” is a spiritual sister to “Burning Bright” but plods rather than runs; at six minutes of churning sludge, you wish Reznor would have lopped off two and half and added them to the opener. Penultimate headbanger “The Idea of You” resembles a Broken-era track updated for 1997’s Reznor-produced Lost Highway soundtrack, with ear-shredding trebly guitar riffs reminiscent of (gulp) NIN-lovers Rammstein and the clear, plaintively struck piano notes from Reznor solo cut “Driver Down.”It’s disappointing that after a four-year wait—let alone the pretension of “[it’s] a record we needed to make”—Not the Actual Events turns out to be so slight, at just five tracks with no dramatic shift in form. It’s the least essential non-instrumental album the band has released. But with the subsequent announcement that “two major events” for NIN in 2017 are now also promised, perhaps Reznor himself knows this already, and it will turn out that that this slight record was in fact, not the actual event.In New York’s experimental scene, the presence of vocalist Amirtha Kidambi on a concert bill has been a consistent indicator of quality. In 2013, she impressed in a live appearance with the legendary composer and improviser Muhal Richard Abrams. At the 2014 Whitney Biennial, she was part of a youthful ensemble that gave the premiere of one of the final operas by the late visionary Robert Ashley. Until forming the group Elder Ones, though, Kidambi had yet to create a vehicle for her own compositions. The quartet that plays on her bandleading debut includes some familiar talents. Drummer Max Jaffe’s jabbing power has been heard in the high-complexity pop of the band JOBS. Soprano saxophonist Matt Nelson’s work has proved critical to recordings by tUnE-yArDs and Battle Trance. But Kidambi is the clear driving agent of the group.While her mostly wordless vocal parts on Holy Science are influenced by the South Indian devotional singing groups she participated in as a child, they also call to mind her past work with composer Darius Jones. Kidambi’s simultaneous harmonium playing reflects her ongoing study of India’s Carnatic classical tradition, as well as her appreciation of modern drone music. And the feeling of free jazz—in particular, the high-intensity blast of late Coltrane—is often present here. That’s a lot of material for any composer to process usefully, but Kidambi and Elder Ones distinguish themselves by fusing these influences with a point of view all their own. With each lengthy track titled after a yuga (or “eon”) in Hindu scripture, Holy Science clearly has significant thematic ambitions. Yet Kidambi’s 64-minute suite contains lively, minute-to-minute variety, in addition to a grand overall design. The title of the opening movement, “Sathya Yuga,” references an ancient eon in Hindu mythology—one in which spiritual enlightenment was widespread. The track opens with the leader’s voice and harmonium playing, and the texture is meditative. Kidambi’s singing has the feel of mantra, with certain groups of syllables receiving devoted repetition. But she also adds to the lines as she goes along, creating a searching quality.When Jaffe enters, he plays in free-time, often using cymbals to accentuate the vocal lines. After Nelson’s soprano sax joins, nearly three minutes in, he and Kidambi begin experimenting—very softly—with unusual harmonies. After a brief solo harmonium drone, a rhythmic vamp is introduced, via Brandon Lopez’s bass. And then the entire band carries this new material to a full boil, with “Sathya Yuga” climaxing in a fiercely swinging, post-minimalist melodic progression. This is a happy intensity: full of a community vibe as well as opportunities for individual expression. But it is not the end of the story.Since subsequent yugas narrate a descent into fractious conflict, the album’s next movement (“Treta-yuga”) incorporates a greater sense of alarm. Here, the free jazz riffs are more anxious sounding. Nelson’s soprano sax language adds in some of the piercing effects heard in the music of virtuosos like Roscoe Mitchell. But still, in moments when the players’ parts fall in-line together, there’s a sense of hard-won beauty.Things fall apart more completely during the third movement, “Dvapara Yuga (for Eric Garner).” Kidambi composed this piece in the hours after first seeing the horrifying cellphone video of Garner’s death at the hands of police officers in the summer of 2014. And Kidambi’s choice to place this contemporary reference in this album’s evocation of the Dvapara eon is smart, and chilling. In Hindu scripture, this is only the second most destructive epoch—and the one in which the Bhagavad Gita is recited. That text, influential to a wide range of thinkers that includes Thoreau, Gandhi, and Martin Luther King, centers on a cosmic battle between warring factions in society: a span of carnage that often results in empty victories.Here, the evocation of ancient and contemporary questions about violence and moral response proves gripping. At the end of this cacophonous movement, Kidambi sounds depleted. Nelson’s saxophone lines are similarly strained—a harrowing reference to Garner’s own increasingly desperate struggle to breathe, as seen on the video that documents his death. At all times, this track works as an oath. In its opening section, it swears memory to a victim. By its close, it promises enduring opposition to unjust outcomes.Even though the suite still has one more era to explore, Holy Science’s relationship to the legacy of free-jazz protest is most pronounced in that third movement. And by this point, it’s clear that Kidambi has managed to house all of her influences in a project that is original. This sound isn’t merely the product of well-chosen reference points; in its abstract way, it makes a unique argument for the virtue of cross-cultural curiosity. Appropriately, the nature of this music is constantly morphing. When a muted introduction gives way to a more celebratory aesthetic, the change is achieved gradually, through small changes in the arrangement. When a demonstration of rage reaches a peak that cannot be sustained, the musicians in Elder Ones are able to navigate back to a more stable feel, without losing the passion and awareness that has animated those foregoing blasts of harshness. The result is an astonishing debut for a composer, and her band.It’s been nearly fourteen years since we last heard new music from beloved K Records heroes the Microphones. After following up their 2001 classic The Glow, Pt. 2 with the challenging and somewhat inscrutable Mount Eerie, they dissolved abruptly before the band—more or less the work of Anacortes, WA resident Phil Elverum and a rotating band of collaborators—confusingly re-emerged a year later as Mount Eerie, having ditched the Microphones moniker in exchange for the name of that final record. Though Elverum has gone on to release more than twelve records over that span, and much of that music covers some of the territory his former band walked, the precise spirit of naive quirkiness of the Microphones has never quite since been replicated.Now in 2016 Elverum has decided to reactivate that old appellation, on a release of twenty-year-old material likely to be unfamiliar to even fans of the band. Titled EARLY TAPES, 1996-98, it’s exactly as stated—a compilation of sixteen songs either previously unreleased or taken from limited release tapes from Beat Happening guitarist Bret Lunsford’s Knw-Yr-Own cassette label. Many fans of the band eager for more Microphones may have had hopes, but to be clear, EARLY TAPES is no “lost classic”; it’s about as definitively a “for the fans” release as you can get. As Elverum himself admits, “Listening back to this music now is mostly embarrassing to me.” And as to why he’s dug finally them out now: “I am still basically an overgrown teenager postponing a real job.” It’s both a completely reasonable motivation for a musician trying to make it in 2016, and still, despite the limited quality of the contents, a valuable exercise for fans of either the band or the era. The value of EARLY TAPES, slightness of the output notwithstanding, is testament to the enduring power of the Microphones and the way they stood in to represent a thriving part of Pacific Northwest indie. Even the album’s first track, the previously unreleased early-days cut “Teenage Moustache”—the album’s silliest moment if not its slightest—manages to conjures a nostalgia not just for the innocent sweetness of early Elverum/Microphones, but also wooly ’90s DIY indie rock (especially of the K Records variety) and the exploding sense of total possibility in the late pre-internet age. The semi-tuned thriftstore guitar recalls the more ramshackle ditties of Beck’s One Foot in the Grave and Stereopathetic Soulmanure, and the vocals recall the teenage warbles on Modest Mouse’s Sad Sappy Sucker. It’s not a great song by any stretch, but there’s something powerful and pleasant about it. Thankfully, it’s not all just nostalgia. There are at least a handful of noteworthy new arrivals on EARLY TAPES. Chief among these is the heart-tugging “Compressor,” which unsurprisingly also serves as the album’s teaser single. A simple concoction of a drummer-boy snare shuffle, two-note guitar lines, and a rhythmic tattoo of a chorus, it resembles a Notwist Neon Golden outtake “ft. Phil Elverum.” The six-minute epic “Wires and Cords” is equally strong, the lone track here that points directly to the force they would become. Elverum also answers a longtime mystery in the song’s liner notes by explaining the original meaning of the band’s name, and why he abandoned it: “My music project was about recording and the terminology around it, vaguely trying to say emotional human stuff using this equipment as a vocabulary....This is towards the end of me trying to use recording technology metaphors and the beginning of the irrelevance of my band name.” An ode of sorts to one of Elverum’s obsessions, Stereolab, this organ-driven love note to former girlfriend and bandmate Bronwyn Holm shows Elverum beginning to look beyond sound sketches and imagining the great possibility of songs as storybooks. Both “Microphone, Pt. 1” and especially the Rentals-en-français “Microphone, Pt. 2” are low-key winners as well.Many of the other inclusions on EARLY TAPES really are of the throwaway variety—go-nowhere instrumentals like “For Kaye June 6” or “(Bass)” whose mundanity suffers further for lacking at least the gut-warming tickle of Elverum’s frail voice. But there’s a wide enough variety to keep the proceedings from dragging and even the weakest moments offer at least a little charm, such as “The Creeps”’s calliope-style noir or “Rebirth on Tape Deck Mountain”’s meditative circular guitar melody.It’s understandable why Elverum felt he had to leave the Microphones behind; sometimes, it’s hard to feel like you’re really growing without a conscious decision to shed your skin, even if the snake underneath is ultimately the same. It’s a testament to that original band’s lasting power and impact that something EARLY TAPES even has an audience at all. The Glow, It Was Hot, We Stayed in the Water, and Don’t Wake Me Up will all remain higher listening priorities than EARLY TAPES, but it’s nice to know this exists. How do you stage an opera that mostly takes places inside a child’s murderous mind? That was one problem facing composer Ben Frost and librettist David Pountney when they set out to make a musical theater piece—Frost’s first ever—of Iain Banks’ 1984 psychological horror novel, The Wasp Factory. The book tells the tale of a psychopathic teen named Frank, who devises bizarre, violent rituals on a desolate Scottish island. Another problem: Frank is a misogynist, and this is no time for the glorification of misogynistic antiheroes.Frost solved both problems in one stroke by asking Pountney to split Frank’s phantasmagoric monologue into a trialogue. Then he assigned the three roles to powerful women, entirely omitting Frank as a character. On this newly-released Bedroom Community recording—the opera premiered in 2013—they are sung with wicked charisma by Lieselot De Wilde, Jördis Richter, and Mariam Wallentin. Not merely aspects of Frank’s psyche, they’re like the Furies, bearers of divine retribution. With justified ferocity, they chew and spit Frank’s infernal confession, and Frost’s music, played by the Reykjavík Sinfonia, coldly stokes the flames.The Australia-born, Iceland-based Frost is popularly known for his electro-acoustic hybrids of classical music and heavy metal. He combines post-minimal finesse with modernist severity and Wagnerian daring, charging into the deepest abysses of quiet and storming up the fieriest peaks of noise. Though the focus is now live sound and the human voice, The Wasp Factory should still resonate with fans of his ambient music. It’s By the Throat inverted, foregrounding classical and recessing electronics, with no entropy in Frost’s signature blend of concussive brawn, delicate tissue, and intricate logic.A small string ensemble pulses in tight swarms, slashing out parallelograms in a holographic medium of bass and distortion. As always, Frost’s hyperreal acoustical shapes don’t seem symbolic—they just uncannily exist, deforming spacetime. This is captured in a recording of rapt, intrusive closeness, the singers lunging into your face, unlike the polite remove typical of classical music.It’s not the only way The Wasp Factory bucks operatic convention. Don’t expect Italianate phrasing or proper coloratura. The vocal lines are lean and soulful, more like jazz, blues, cabaret, and pop. The belling timbre on “Blyth” is very Björk, while the indecorous bellow of “Wrong!” on “I See You’ve Washed Your Hands Again” is midway between Benjamin Britten, composer of Peter Grimes, and Nicki Minaj on “Monster.” If you’ve been looking for an accessible way into contemporary opera, this could very well be it. (If you’ve been listening to art music by the likes of Jenny Hval, let alone Shara Worden’s chamber operas, you’re almost there.)Frost is well suited to a narrative form like opera because his music is dense with acoustical narratives, interlocked from the atomic to the cosmic level. A single bass drop on “I See You’ve Washed Your Hands Again” tells a whole story in seconds. It’s nested in the shape of the song, an inexorable grip and release. “My Greatest Enemies Are Women and the Sea” rises to a vertex right in the middle, as the title line is sung, flooding it with climactic power. And these well shaped songs are also absorbed in an album-long struggle from dark to light, as a pearly shimmer gradually emerges from the dark, lush crags of the early reaches.The Wasp Factory is mad but serene, vile but alluring. The plot is strictly nightmarish. Frank’s brother has escaped from the hospital, and the exact length of a certain knife must be ascertained; he murders his cousin Blyth, with an artificial leg, using a venomous snake. Stark vignettes divulge Frank’s brutality to animals (and worse), his obsession with what it means to exist. “To be mastered,” we learn, “the world must be named.” Frank can find mastery only in violence, which infests his language. The opera’s title refers to a maze he makes from a clock where wasps meet various gruesome ends. To Frank, it’s a divination device; to us, it’s a searing illustration of a worldview in which time and life are machines that manufacture doom. Frost winds this bleak psychology with shockingly beautiful music, and finds in opera an exciting new form of expression for his profoundly psychological sonic abstractions. Kacey Musgraves continues to follow her arrow. In 2013, she built her reputation as an antidote to all that was said to be ailing country music: a traditionalist of unobtrusively twangy arrangements and a credible small-town Texas background, who was also slyly progressive in her down-home narratives. She cowrote Miranda Lambert’s deliciously vengeful mini-masterpiece “Mama’s Broken Heart” and released her own major-label debut, Same Trailer Different Park, which beat out Taylor Swift and the genre’s swaggering bros to win the Best Country Album Grammy. In 2015, she released Pageant Material; that record didn’t go big, it went home, eschewing radio-friendly hits to double down gorgeously on the gentle, folksy nuance of its predecessor. It opened at No. 1 but didn’t sell as well overall.Its follow-up, A Very Kacey Christmas, is yet another left turn from Musgraves. The third album is pretty early in an artist’s catalog for a holiday record, but she throws herself into this one as wholeheartedly as any proper LP. Her great epiphany is the short distance between rhinestones and aluminum trees, how what once was considered tacky and artificial can, with time, come to seem nostalgic and real. Musgraves’ album summons up the mid-’60s era nostalgia of A Charlie Brown Christmas, gliding naturally from her established Western-swing throwback aesthetic to kitschy exotica and vintage pop, with an expertly curated song selection that leans on campy novelties, classy standards, and a stocking’s worth of originals.Because our Christmas recordings pile up over the years, to be dusted off with the other decorations for a few weeks and then put back in their boxes, they may be one of the few types of albums many people still play in full. The sequencing of A Very Kacey Christmas exploits this advantage. Musgraves doesn’t rush her conceit, opening elegantly but conventionally with cello and pedal steel on “Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas,” followed by a sleigh bells- and fiddle-accented “Let It Snow” with fellow Western swingers the Quebe Sisters. She shows her hand next on—of all things!—a polka-like cover of “Christmas Don’t Be Late,” a/k/a “The Chipmunk Song.” Replacing the cartoon characters’ irritating high-pitched voices with Musgraves’ crystalline effortlessness (and ditching the “ALVIN!!!” banter) renders this familiar bit of silliness deeply affecting; when Musgraves sings, “I still want a hula-hoop,” it’s with the poignancy of a adult yearning for all that she didn’t get in Christmases past.The other non-originals are cut from similarly elvin-green cloth, and they’re thoroughly enjoyable if less revelatory. Musgraves salvages “I Want a Hippopotamus for Christmas,” an oft-annoying mid-century gag record, gamely singing about not wanting “rhinoceroses-es.” She delivers an effectively restrained “Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer” with children chiming in with schoolyard backing vocals. Elsewhere, Musgraves lets the band’s instrumental prowess shine in a nimble, mariachi-flavored “Feliz Navidad.” Another song about various cultural ways of saying merry Christmas, the Hawaiian ditty “Mele Kalikimaka,” piles on the pedal steel, with the Quebe Sisters returning on close-knit harmonies. Ending with a woozy “What Are You Doing New Year’s Eve?”—capped by a snatch of “Auld Lang Syne” on piano, around a hearth of ambient chatter—feels obvious but fitting, like watching It’s a Wonderful Life on Christmas Eve.The four originals here vary in their success, “A Willie Nice Christmas,” if you’ll forgive a pun (and you’ll have to) is Musgraves’ weed-heavy holiday reunion with Willie Nelson, whose 1965 song “Are You Sure” she rebooted with him on Pageant Material. It is hardly essential, but notable for merely existing: Musgraves, who once sang, “I’m always higher than my hair,” name-checks “On the Road Again” and hopes “we’ll all stay higher than the star at the top of the tree,” as Nelson genially reminds us not to get so stressed. “Present Without a Bow,” which features Musgraves’ fellow classicist Leon Bridges, reaches for the holiday soulfulness of a song like Charles Brown’s “Please Come Home for Christmas,” but it doesn’t quite cohere. “Ribbons and Bows,” an upbeat hand-clapper in the Ronettes and Darlene Love mode, feels like a potential single, with “All I Want for Christmas Is You”-style lyrics channeled through Musgraves’ eye for what “the ladies [down] at the hair salon” will say.The real gift here is “Christmas Makes Me Cry,” a gut-punching acoustic ballad that Musgraves cowrote with Brandy Clark and Shane McAnally. While another country star with crossover ability, Dolly Parton, sang about keeping a stiff upper lip in her “Hard Candy Christmas,” Musgraves confides now that Nat King Cole, starry-eyed kids, and “seeing mom and dad get a little grayer” each year never fails to bring tears to her eyes. “Another year gone by/Just one more that I/I couldn't make it home,” she sings. For all her retro leanings, she wisely chooses to sing about contemporary people trying our damndest to be cheerful and loving in a particularly hectic—and, often, sad and heavy—time of year. Getting a little misty-eyed around the holidays? Now that’s a sentiment everyone can appreciate, in any era.2016 has been a surreal and absurd year for most, but what a whirlwind it must have been for Melina Duterte. The San Francisco musician who performs as Jay Som (a moniker meaning “Victory Moon” and pulled from a baby name generator a la Childish Gambino) toured with Mitski and Japanese Breakfast, released a 7” on Fat Possum, opened for Peter Bjorn and John, signed to Polyvinyl, and has been working on a debut LP. This flurry of activity is largely the result of a tipsy decision made on Thanksgiving 2015, when Duterte spontaneously dropped a nine-track collection of “unfinished and finished songs” onto Bandcamp under the name Untitled. “It was completely unplanned,” Duterte told Rookie. “I didn’t even think about the track listing or the album artwork or the order of songs. I have a ton of these songs, and from them I picked nine.”That these tracks, later retitled as Turn Into, are technically demos is essential to understanding why the collection has been re-released twice, first by Top Shelf and later by Polyvinyl. Each track is a deeply polished offering that reflects Duterte’s past musical experience and forecasts her promising future. She grew up playing the trumpet and planned to attend a conservatory program after high school to pursue her love of jazz. Instead, after realizing that she wanted to continue songwriting, she enrolled at community college to study music production and recording. She turned her bedroom into a studio, even removing the bed to install a drum set and puttered around with the tracks that would become Turn Into. She plays every instrument on the album, a feat that may remind some of Alex G’s home recordings, in addition to mixing and mastering. Turn Into kicks off with “Peach Boy,” a kaleidoscopic dream-pop number featuring lush vocals and elastic wah-wah guitar effects (appropriately, considering Duterte’s history, early wah pedals were called “Clyde McCoy”s after the jazz trumpeter). Clouds move in for “Ghost” and the daydreaming melodies turn gloomy as Duterte confronts her fears. “Being scared is a huge theme of the album,” Duterte told San Francisco’s KQED, and even its most upbeat, these songs contain undercurrents of anxiety. There are moments on the album where you can feel her audibly pushing against these restraints, like on “Next to Me,” when she calls out “I’m waiting too long I’ve had it I want to scream/And fuck being patient I’m fragile I’m not weak” before disappearing back into the squall. Turn Into clouds into melancholy during its middle third. “Drown” resembles My Bloody Valentine at their most mellow or Mazzy Star at their murkiest. “Our Red Door” and “Unlimited Touch” feature woozy, extended instrumental swirls that invite you to drift with them.  “Why I Say No” and “SLOW” wend slowly back into warmer territory before pale sunlight of the title track pokes through. The slinky guitars and wistful vocals recall Death Cab’s “Your Heart Is an Empty Room,” and confirms that Jay Som is a multifaceted project, capable of painting in multiple shades.  The phrase “mastered by Rashad Becker” in an album’s liner notes confers a seal of approval that can't be equaled. As engineer at Berlin’s Dubplates & Mastering, Becker’s name can be found on almost any noteworthy techno or experimental release of the past twenty years. His own music came as a pleasant surprise when he released his debut album for PAN with 2013’s Traditional Music of Notional Species, Vol. 1. At that time, he already had 1200 titles with his credit on them. With Vol. 2, a look at his Discogs page reveals that tally is now nearing 1600 releases. That Becker even has time to contemplate his own music seems impossible, like the leader of a country also having spare time to executive produce a television show. Much like his first album, he breaks the sides (none of which pass the 4:45 mark) into “Themes” and “Dances,” though one would be hard-pressed to determine the concepts underpinning one side, much less figure out just what moves and steps would comprise the latter. As the title suggests, it’s an album redolent of Smithsonian Folkways’ field recordings from Africa and Indonesia, with nods to early musique concrète and intercepted extraterrestrial transmissions. So maybe it’s closest comparison is to the ritualistic sounds of alien tribes as overheard by a curious visitor. “Themes VII” wheezes and lurches and bumps into things, while “Themes VI” rattles like a china cabinet loaded into a UFO. The near-vocal quality of his sounds and their cartoonish weirdness brings to mind Hans Reichel’s self-made daxophone, a bizarre wooden instrument that you bow to elicit sounds. “Dances V” stretches and purrs like some space-age polymer while Becker gets an especially nougat-y bass tone for “Dances VI.”Whenever Becker conjures a familiar sound, he quickly husks history, meaning and expectations from it so that it might quiver in space all on its own, like a cell under a microscope. A mental picture that forms at the beginning of a piece will lose its meaning by the end. So yes, “Themes V” has frequencies suggesting struck metal and the rhythms of a gamelan ensemble. But what to make of the worming frequencies, shortwave static and what sounds like a thrummed comb that then intrude upon the track? His tracks bring sounds, descriptors, and language itself into question.“Notional” becomes the operative word here, as each piece feels conjectural, possible but unreal. There is, again, a folkloric tinge, an echo of music from peoples in other parts of the world never previously encountered by the West. Much like early electronic music and musique concrète anticipated the means that lies behind most modern music-making—even though it seemed to merely be noise and gibberish at the time—there’s an aspect of Becker’s work that sounds like nonsense, yet also hints at what we might deem music in another half-century.  All is not well with Ray Charles’ catalog nowadays. Digital retailers in the US can’t sell or stream the entirety of titles like Genius + Soul = Jazz. Same goes for both volumes of Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music. While the pianist, vocalist, and composer’s essential 1950s sessions for Atlantic Records remain in print, CD editions of his classic 1960s albums for ABC are only available on budget import labels. One exception to that rule—Concord’s five-CD box of the ABC singles, issued in 2011—has already been discontinued. This isn’t remotely fine. But until new distribution agreements are hammered out, that’s where the situation rests.At least the general scarcity has a way of making a fresh discovery seem all the more exciting. Now, a new entry in the long-running “Swiss Radio Days” reissue series gives us Zurich 1961, a concert that certainly qualifies as thrilling. On this 79-minute gig, captured that year in a Swiss concert hall, Charles’ big band rips into a few tunes he’d already made popular, in addition to songs and arrangements crafted by a certain up-and-coming talent named Quincy Jones. (The two men met in their teens; Jones later gave Charles some arrangements that he’d already released on his own.)Charles’ band begins this Zurich date with two Jones charts: “Happy Faces” (originally by Sonny Stitt) and then “Along Came Betty” (a Benny Golson composition). The opener leaps out with an urgency that stacks up well against Jones’ original version (as heard on The Birth of a Band LP). Charles isn’t audible on these first two performances, but his band delivers the hard-charging riffs and cooler, finger-snapping rhythms with regal confidence.Charles’ composition “My Baby” follows, and the track serves as his formal introduction to the audience—as well as that of the Raelettes, a quartet of backup singers. As an ensemble within the larger group, the Raelettes provide suave harmonies and bluesy, solo exclamations. They offer swinging support behind Charles’ lead vocals during the uptempo “Sticks and Stones”—a cover that Charles found success with, two years prior. The only thing dragging this song down is the fact that the leader’s piano is mixed too low. As the crowd’s post-song applause dies away, you can hear a tense bit of chatter from Charles, addressed to an unidentified colleague, as the pianist slides into the introduction of “Georgia on My Mind.” (At one point, it sounds like he says, “I can’t hear, man; I told you.”)The balance problems are fixed in a hurry. The subsequent performance of “Georgia” is a soulful revelation, as Charles stretches the tune to over six minutes, supported by bass and flute. He teases like hell with his vocal and piano lines, while David Newman’s flute pirouettes in a showier manner. At its close, the full band’s entrance makes for deliriously hot stuff. After you’ve heard this take, you might never need to hear the comparatively chaste studio version ever again.The rest of the concert repeats this recipe: an extended jam that allows big band members to flex their soloing muscles, and doesn’t always feature direct involvement from Charles himself (including “Blue Stone,” written by Charles’ musical director, Hank Crawford.) Then he swoops in to make everything that much better, as you can hear on a strutting sequence that includes “Margie” and “Hit the Road Jack.”By this point, all of Charles’s contributions are being mixed properly—and everything is coming up god-level. His high screams and gully-low growls cavort with barroom piano trills during “I’ve Got News for You.” The Raelettes outdo their past work with Charles on a shattering, occasionally hushed “I Believe to My Soul.” This version of “Come Rain or Come Shine,” in a modernized Jones arrangement, is another powerhouse that makes the canonic ‘50s studio reading seem bashful. The blending of styles is so transporting, it can be easy to neglect all that's going on—the flashes of R&B, soul-jazz, gospel, post-bop and blues that pull together. The result is some of the best American pop that’s ever been made. The way things have been going in the world of distribution, this CD will probably fall out of print in a few months. Sleep on it at your own risk. Occultist and ceremonial magician Aleister Crowley once said “I slept with faith and found a corpse in my arms on awakening; I drank and danced all night with doubt and found her a virgin in the morning.” Parsing this opaque statement reveals it was just Crowley’s cryptic, verbose way of devaluing faith and championing skepticism; a fake-deep principle demeaning the moralist position, the “Gotta Hear Both Sides” of a pseudo-cerebral ideology.It also reads like an Ab-Soul bar these days. It’s fitting that Crowley, once dubbed the Wickedest Man in the World and written off as a Satanist for his musings about the supernatural, has been a source of inspiration for TDE’s syllable-twisting, in-house conspiracy theorist, who is becoming so information-obsessed that he seems to be losing sight of actual meaning—perhaps a bit woozy from inhaling around all the tomes and scrolls and manuscripts he’s been dusting off. His songs have become so abstract that very little happens in them anymore; they’re all empty puzzles, mazes made of loosely parsed Greek myths, astrological information, and the unfinished script pages for National Treasure 3, meant to be mind-fucking but revealed to be mush when even gently interrogated. His new album, Do What Thou Wilt., named for the defining law of Crowley’s Thelemic philosophy, is the ultimate act of performative wokeness.It wasn’t always this way: Ab-Soul has been a thoughtful writer in the past, making sense of fringe sciences and unorthodox philosophies with elastic rhyme schemes, gently massaging them to suit grand proclamations about society’s shortcomings or personal explorations for spirituality. His breakout, Control System, remains among the best Top Dawg releases, boasting one of the most heart-wrenching and personal rap songs of the past several years (“The Book of Soul”). But the rapper has strayed from the confessional and introspective brand of stargazing that once made him one of rap’s most interesting voices. In recent outings, Soul has emerged as rap’s preeminent quasi-intellectual, besting peers like Lupe Fiasco and Jay Electronica (who he disses on Kendrick’s behalf here) with dramatic logical leaps, upping the ante with nonsense bars. Ab-Soul spends so much time mixing pagan and Christian texts on Do What Thou Wilt. that it’s unclear what exactly he believes, or worse, what he’s trying to persuade us to believe. These songs are mostly self-serving or pointless, and they all contain plenty of bad phonetic reaches and try-hard wordplay. There’s a song called “Huey Knew THEN.” (Get it?!) It interpolates the “Fresh Prince of Bel-Air” theme and he raps “I’m hornier than the brass section of the band, you understand?” This is what would happen if you gave Shia LaBeouf some DMT, a 12th Planet documentary, and a World Religions textbook. The production comes courtesy of longtime collaborators like Sounwave, Tae Beast, Willie B, and Skhye Hutch, names familiar to TDE canon like Rahki and the Antydote, and notable outside producers like WondaGurl and A$AP P on the Boards. It’s mostly dark and ominous, with sloping traditionalist breaks that slink just behind the downbeat. When it’s good, dense, or atmospheric like on “Braille” on “Now You Know,” it can settle Soul into a comfortable rhythm or obscure some of his worse lines; but when it’s bland (“Womanogamy”) or overwrought (“God’s a Girl?”), things become twice as grating, and often unlistenable. Do What Thou Wilt. has been billed both as a love story and a “woman-appreciation album.” It’s also supposedly an exploration of Crowley’s wicked objectives and Soul’s goal of being the most righteous man, among other stray themes. These many mismatching, criss-crossing threads create an incredibly convoluted 77-minute slog that is as tough to listen to as it is to digest. The overly-busy “God’s a Girl?” boasts the lines “You got me crying with a hard dick (amen)” and “come have sex with Jesus” in the first 35 seconds. “Wifey vs. WiFi / / /  P.M.S.” can’t decided if it’s a song about how digital communication interferes with intimacy or an extended prison metaphor. “Womanogamy” is a half-baked manifesto about liking girls that like girls that are in love with him; “RAW (backwards)” is a construction of lazy word games (“Man, I got so many flows them shits come with ceilings”); “YMF” or Young Mind Fuck, is lined with the most boring paradox of all-time: if Ab-Soul calls himself a liar, does that make him a liar, or is a liar calling himself a liar a lie? A better question: Who cares?Among the worst songs is “Threatening Nature,” a single that proved to be a microcosm of the entire project. It’s an undercooked concept with even flimsier raps that would get laughed out of a smoke circle of college freshmen: “With all disrespect, I think the American flag was designed by fags,” he says, a line that would probably be repugnantly offensive if it weren't so ridiculous. On “Evil Genius” Soul raps, “I studied theology, ancient philosophy, astronomy, astrology/The current state of the economy/Washington D.C., fossils and dinosaurs/The origin of our species.” Perhaps he should’ve spent a bit more time studying music.“Fuck your magazine,” growls Pantera frontman Phil Anselmo on the album-opening title track of what is easily the most abrasive and chaotic album in the Texas thrash band's storied career. As its title suggests, The Great Southern Trendkill was supposed to be Pantera’s re-dedication of purpose amidst a musical climate where metal was falling out of favor. In a way, it was. More than that, however, the album exposes the personal turmoil that would later sink the band for good.Perhaps it’s understandable that Anselmo and company felt like the world was closing in on them. By the time they set out to make The Great Southern Trendkill in late ’95, Pantera were one of the lone remaining thrash-era metal acts that could still reasonably expect to shift half a million units. More crucially, they were one of the only ones doing so without diluting their sound. In fact, Pantera were growing more successful by getting heavier with each record. Whether or not we accept the popular narrative that the so-called alternative revolution had rendered metal “uncool” again, most of Pantera’s peers had hit steep career drop-offs and were struggling to remain visible. So it must have felt convenient for bands like them to point the finger at a fickle music establishment they felt was turning on them. But that was a curious position for Pantera to take considering they’d managed to achieve world-beater status in 1992—right in the heyday of Lollapalooza and 120 Minutes—and debuted at Number One on the Billboard album chart with 1994’s Far Beyond Driven. They may have seen it differently, but the truth is Pantera were riding a momentous wave of success when it came time to record The Great Southern Trendkill. And regardless, in spite of his chest-beating against the band's supposed enemies in the music press, on Southern Trendkill Anselmo exposes no one else but himself as his worst enemy. In one of the breakdown sections of second track “War Nerve,” for example, Anselmo stops singing altogether and spits-up a tirade: “For every fucking second the pathetic media pisses on me and judges what I am in one paragraph, look here: FUCK YOU ALLLLLLLLLLLL.” To be fair, Anselmo is hardly the first performer to vent against critics (and one can only imagine how much more venomous his lyrics would have been had music blogs like this one been as prominent back then as they are now). But it’s telling that he can't keep his ire focused on an external source for the entire song, which begins with the lines “Fuck the world for all it’s worth/Every inch of planet earth/Fuck myself/Don’t leave me out.” Sure, Anselmo’s stream-of-consciousness wordplay often targeted multiple adversaries in single songs in the past, but “War Nerve” betrays his then-increasing tendency towards self-loathing and incoherence. Anselmo caused a furor this past January when he made a Nazi-salute gesture and screamed “white power” onstage. Indeed, hints of Anselmo’s racial anxieties shadowed Pantera throughout their career, with Kurt Loder addressing them point-blank in a 1994 MTV News clip. And in a 1995 onstage rant that’s made the rounds on YouTube for years, Anselmo weighs-in on his disdain for rap culture and the “stop black-on-black crime” slogan in front of a Montreal audience. Though Anselmo starts off by saying “we’re not a racist band,” he later urges the audience to have pride in its white heritage.  Crucially, in that clip he uses the word “trend" to describe what he’s railing against—the implied subtext being that we were moving too far towards a restrictive PC culture. It doesn’t take a mathematician to put two and two together here and see how easily such statements lend themselves to a white-supremacist agenda. And so hearing Anselmo spew bile against “trends” on the The Great Southern Trendkill, one has to wonder what else was on his mind that he didn’t have the guts to say flat-out. Whatever else you can say about him, though, you have to acknowledge that in his prime Anselmo was an electrifying performer—one of metal’s all-time greatest frontmen—with a relentless drive to create. (His prolific output in numerous bands bears that out.) Just four years earlier, Anselmo’s unparalleled intensity had supercharged the band's breakout album Vulgar Display of Power with an undeniable electricity. Listening to it, you couldn’t help but feel emboldened and empowered. Following up with Far Beyond Driven, Anselmo was able to keep up the same motivational demeanor, but a darker, more personal set of lyrics pointed to a cracking psyche behind the bravado. By the The Great Southern Trendkill, Anselmo’s psychic degeneration is alarmingly complete, and what was once a cathartic roar begins to verge on psychosis as Anselmo’s bandmates push themselves further and further to extremes as well. Previous Pantera albums presented aggression as an athletic high. By contrast, on Southern Trendkill’s most frantic moments, the aggression hews closer to self-mutilation—a last-ditch attempt to provoke sensation when you’re too numb to feel anything. On songs like the title track and “Suicide Note Pt. II,” Pantera trade-in their trademark high-velocity boogie grooves for blurry spasms of noise. Fittingly enough for a band so openly plagued by substance abuse problems, on Southern Trendkill the “high” in the heaviness is gone. The album offers zero of the euphoric rush of the band’s earlier efforts, and there's almost no release to be found in its negativity. All that’s left is to wallow in the despair. It was also telling that Anselmo—by this point deep in the throes of heroin and prescription painkiller addiction—recorded his vocals separately from the rest of the band at Trent Reznor’s Nothing studios in New Orleans while his bandmates recorded the music at guitarist Dimebag Darrell Abbott’s home studio in Dallas. According to the liner notes, Anselmo was actually present for writing and demo’ing material with the band in pre-production. But the fact that producer Terry Date needed to serve as go-between speaks to a communication block that couldn't have been good for the creative process. Nevertheless, even all that internal dysfunction wasn’t enough to blunt the searing vitality of the final product. When it comes to music that captures the personal implosion of an artist about to go off the rails, The Great Southern Trendkill is about as thrilling as they come. It’s also the first time that Anselmo truly shows his fragility, ugly and wretched as it may be. As harried as its outlook is, The Great Southern Trendkill's seething hopelessness reveals a desperation that Far Beyond Driven hinted at but downplayed in favor of balls-out swagger. This time, Pantera no longer sound larger-than-life but instead like actual three-dimensional (and very fucked-up) people.The Great Southern Trendkill gets extreme in spots, but it showcases the contrasts in the band’s musical DNA more than any of their other albums. The title track, for example, suddenly lurches from its blistering near-grindcore pace to a slow-moseying blues rock section laced with a trademark Dimebag solo, his love for original KISS guitarist Ace Frehley’s hummable leads still as evident as ever. Even more jarring, the energetic main riff on “Living Through Me (Hell’s Wrath)” recalls the vibe of classic ’80s thrash. But that period suddenly feels innocent and far back in the rearview mirror in comparison to the gloom that engulfs this album, especially when the song switches into a creepy dark-industrial mid-section that reflects its narrative about a harrowing sexual encounter between two junkies. In another experimental detour, on “Suicide Note Pt. 1” Pantera actually try their hand at an acoustic ballad. Perhaps more shockingly, the song sounds like a cross between (then-trendy!) Stone Temple Pilots and Zeppelin’s “Over the Hills and Far Away.” Anselmo—an infinitely more capable singer than his harsh screams might indicate—drops his guard and opens up about his own suicidal urges. For once, the band gives us a glimpse into pain that’s genuinely affecting. The Great Southern Trendkill’s rough-edged flaws help generate the music’s unique power almost as much as the band's blind determination to keep ratcheting-up the intensity level, come what may. It perhaps sums up the album’s mood best that, while touring to support it, Anselmo overdosed from heroin and was pronounced dead for over four minutes after a show in Dallas. Incredibly enough, he played the next show. Listening back to the album, both the overdose and the decision to just keep going make perfect sense. The band, apparently, had so much fire in its veins that it couldn't even stop itself—at least not right away.  The unifying thread in Gucci Mane’s music since being released from prison this past May after serving nearly three years for drug and gun charges can be summed up in one word: readjustment. His stunning physical transformation—which included losing 75 pounds and the emergence of an enviable six-pack, the results of a healthier drug-free lifestyle—also impacted Gucci’s rapping itself. Aside from the usual sort of rust that needed to be shaken off, his dramatic weight loss affected his delivery in other tangible ways (which only stoked the fires of the clone conspiracy theories): the new Gucci was less congested, less slurred, and less guttural.July’s Everybody Looking felt like an exploratory mission, as if he was unfamiliar with his own voice and testing out his new physical presence for size. Three months later, Woptober followed, which found the prolific Atlanta rapper increasing his familiarity with his vocal register, his rapping tighter and more assured. On The Return of East Atlanta Santa, his final release of 2016, Gucci has caught up with his new normal, sounding fully acclimatized to the new version of himself. No longer is he searching for his footing: on opener “St. Brick Intro” he immediately slips in the pocket of Zaytoven’s funhouse minor-key rework of “Jingle Bells” and paints himself as the trap Kris Kringle: “Middle of the winter, I pull up in a vert / It’s the middle of December, she pulled up in a skirt/ Santa Claus of the hood, I pull up with the work / They call me East Atlanta Santa, run up on me, get murked.” Irreverent and silly as hell, the only thing that might prevent it from joining the pantheon of unconventional Christmas bangers is the slightness that comes with acting as an album’s welcome mat.The holiday cheer extends no further, but the album’s remaining twelve tracks benefit from similarly locked-in performances. Whereas Everybody Looking and Woptober mirrored Gucci’s new lifestyle in content as well as form—he opened Everybody Looking by introducing himself as a “recovering drug addict”—here it is reflected in the clarity of his performance. The allusions to cleaner living are mostly oblique. “Last Time” features Travis Scott in support mode—which also happens to be his best mode—and preaches conscientiousness in recreational drug use. It contains some of the few direct references to Gucci’s erratic last decade: “See I’m an ex-X popper and online shopper / Niggas thought I was a clone, they heard me speak proper.” The other nod to his self-destructive past arrives in the chorus of “I Can’t,” one of the stickiest in his post-prison output: “You can talk about homicides, but I can’t.”Gucci himself remains as magnetic as ever. He isn’t overwhelmed when Drake shows up to pull double duty on “Both,” lending his voice to the song's chorus as well as contributing a verse of his own. It’s more successful than the last time the two linked up—“Back on Road” off Everybody Looking—on which a phoned-in Drake hook added little. Gucci’s also still capable of rattling off deceptively poetic turns of phrases like “Now my watch so fucking bright it look like sunlight in the night,” as heard on the Mike WiLL Made-It-produced standout “Nonchalant.” On the same song he raps “In a whip so new, valet scared to park it,” an example of his sense of humor, which doesn't always get enough credit. The Return of East Atlanta Santa leans on this lighter, more playful side of Gucci’s personality, proving along the way that back to business doesn’t have to mean an absence of fun.In director Pablo Larrain’s Jackie, unlike almost any movie made about the assassination of John F. Kennedy, there are no hints of shadowy puppet masters or boogeymen: there is simply the spotlight on one person’s grieving, complicated by the grief of an entire nation. Accompanying the film is a score written by Mica Levi, whose work in film in the last three years is slowly surpassing any of her output as an experimental producer or art-pop rocker (with Micachu and the Shapes). Her score for Jonathan Glazer’s Under the Skin proved Levi’s ability to create sound that is not only atmospheric, but definitive to the film itself. With the power of an orchestra behind her, Levi provides Jackie a palpitating pulse for the film’s portrait of a seemingly unknowable historical figure.The score introduces itself in the film immediately as Natalie Portman walks through autumnal grounds of the Kennedy compound. She is walking towards her home, to meet a reporter (Theodore H. White, who wrote a LIFE magazine article that largely began the Camelot myth surrounding the Kennedy administration) to discuss life after November 22. The camera zooms in on Portman’s grimace, as she makes her way home, and Levi’s “Intro,” swoops into the scene with ghostly strings, immediately setting a tone of melancholy. Throughout the film, Levi’s score is used sparingly, but with sensitive accuracy. Here in these first few minutes of the film, it gives weight to all the dead foliage. The camera often lingers on Portman’s face, especially when she is looking in the mirror. In moments like these, Levi’s score emerges unexpectedly, giving a strange stability to these often frayed and vulnerable visual experiences. One moment in particular haunted me. Shortly after the assassination, Portman finds herself in the bathroom of Air Force One, right before LBJ is sworn in as president. She looks in the mirror, wiping away blood from her face and blouse. When Portman cleans the viscera off the mirror, smudging its surface and blurring away her image, the piece “Tears,” which was barely perceptible as a nervous string arrangement at the beginning of the scene asserts itself. A simple chord progression of keys gives a momentary balm, and frames the scene perfectly. Jackie is replete with visual moments like this one, that are painful to look at. What Levi’s music can do is provide a brief respite, smoothing the razor edges of a picture. And unlike her work in Under the Skin, Levi’s score in Jackie is unobtrusive, it exists when you need and want it to, providing either a relief from or a multiplication of the grief the film is relating. Listening to the whole score removed from the film, it’s easy to spot the same sounds used over and over again. At times, these leitmotifs can seem uninteresting when stretched out into compositions. But when you revisit them, there is a puncturing sensation to these repetitions. One theme in particular: a swell of descending strings that mimic the action of exhaling a very deep breath, is quite affecting. It appears in the introductory song, as well as in “Lee Harvey Oswald” (a piece used during the assassination scene) and “Walk to the Capitol” (which that soundtracks the funeral procession). In these parts of the film, the regular reaction might be to hold your breath, while processing the overwhelming sadness. But, what Levi’s score can do, is give the film and the viewer a way to stabilize a reaction; the strings allow you to feel oxygen in the room.As a piece of music alone, it is hard to separate Levi’s compositions from their pragmatic function as a score. When revisiting the score weeks after watching the movie, the effect of certain sounds and movements was apparitional, the film’s power lingering essentially because Levi’s sonic cues were so well-wrought. Without her work the film might be less complete. Like an solid frame to a complex painting, Levi’s score concretizes and helps control the artistic experience of the film. In effect, the score may not supersede its filmic anchor, but is sure does make the entire endeavor more beautiful. Scott Mescudi does not make small projects. His shortest album, Satellite Flight: The Journey to Mother Moon, runs 41 minutes, and last year, he somehow wrung over 91 minutes out of the psychedelic acoustic Speedin’ Bullet 2 Heaven. Grandiosity is part of Kid Cudi’s charm: His world is melodramatic and vast while remaining entrenched in his most personal memories. While his issues are his own (and typically petty), he conveys them as important, as if they fit into a larger universal scheme where things have meaning and happen for a reason. In 2009, he slowly opened the doors to that world, hum-singing “Welcome/You’re in my dreams” on Man on the Moon’s intro. His latest tome, the 87-minute Passion, Pain & Demon Slayin’, continues that tradition. It’s expansive, and Cudi is as focused as he’s been since 2010’s Man on the Moon II: The Legend of Mr. Rager. But it also comes with the same drawbacks that have plagued the Cleveland artist throughout his career: His albums require full immersion and acceptance of his worldview to function, but it’s still not clear that he has found something new (or anything at all) to say that makes him a unique voice worth hearing.To start his career, Cudi flaunted his vulnerabilities, endearing him to fans who went through similar troubles. By MOTM II, he took on a more advisory role, calmly offering, “I am your big brother” on “Revofev.” When martyrdom proved fruitless and thankless, he got lost in those troubles, and preferred to steer negative: “You doubt him, don’t know a damn thing about him/What is hip-hop without him,” from Indicud’s “King Wizard.” On Passion, Pain & Demon Slayin’, Cudi has returned to the Man on the Moon attitudes, where he is the pained and wizened sad sack—at once able to offer comfort and vulnerable to his own destructive tendencies.“Swim in the Light,” for instance, is truly affecting, a sort of meditative moment of ambient hip-hop. The minimalist offering conjures deeper images and feeling buried deep within the track; “you could try and numb the pain, but it’ll never go away,” he advises. But when he tries to expound, as on “Wounds,” he finds himself mired in cliché, suggesting you “dig deeper” to find yourself. It’s a constant theme in Cudi’s work; his songs might feel important, but since he only operates in tired symbolism, does he have anything worth saying? Little on Passion convinces that Cudi is a greater authority on the ways of the world than he’s been before, but growth is not as much a part of his repertoire as the frequent suggestions of ascension would lead you to believe. Like he states on “Swim in the Light,” the problems don’t disappear, so a Cudi experience is simply finding new warm atmospheres to bask in the darkness.Lyrics have been Cudi’s most frequent struggle. The closing “Surfin’” is a very catchy song that excels on its hook alone, but Cudi finds great difficulty in biding his time between choruses. Forced to say something in the interim, he comes up with “The industry is so full of shit/Welcome, y’all, to the enema.” He’s barely ever been a rapper, which made him more unique and interesting when end rhymes and pacing were of little concern to him.As usual with his music, Passion’s best moments come from its production. Cudi brought back his career-launching accomplice Plain Pat, and recruited Kanye soothsayer Mike Dean, which lends cohesion and focus to the record. Regardless of its dull content, “Frequency” sounds vibrant, thanks to an instrumental that marries the ambition of Man on the Moon with the spacey calmness of Satellite Flight. The Pat-produced “Dance 4 Eternity” feature beautiful synths that hum around the background with skittering hi-hats that drive the song. And “The Guide” is a menacing whirl, enlivened by an André 3000 verse. At its worst, however, too much of the album blends together—“Kitchen” and “Cosmic Warrior” may as well be the same song. The same goes for “Distant Fantasies,” “Wounds,” and “Mature Nature.” At this point in his firmly established career, Kid Cudi does not wish to be a savior, and he is less interested in being a brat, as Speedin’ Bullet 2 Heaven allowed him an outlet to lash out against himself and others. The meaning of his music has gone entirely internal, with the listener left to search for the “Frequency” on Cudi’s terms and in his realm. The 87-minute runtime is both ridiculous and somehow necessary; if the redundancies were cut, some of the self-importance would be lost. The extended monotony allows you to get lost in Cudi’s ego and your own head, clearing room amid the nothingness to discover and create meaning.When something gets tagged as nerdcore rap, the implications are clear: this is for the Star Wars diehards, the sub-Redditors worried about the Marvel Cinematic Universe’s continuity with canon, or as Alex Trebek once put it on “Jeopardy!,” “losers.” It’s less MF Doom coolly retconning a comic supervillain into an enigmatic rap persona, and more Childish Gambino’s “Freaks and Geeks.” Nerdcore rap evokes the awkward and gangly, completely at odds with traditional rap bravado but still unknowingly, clumsily pantomiming its gestures nonetheless. To a point, it has long been insinuated that nerdcore rap is mostly just a safe space for introverted white males to write artlessly hypertechnical verses of Guardians of the Galaxy fan fiction and the like.Enter Sammus, a Cornell PhD student and rapper/producer named for the Metroid heroine, making what she calls “black girl nerd rap.” Her strongest work to date is Pieces in Space, a weird and confessional collection of songs about being weird and confessional. Sammus’ music represents an under-reached subset of geek fandom: it’s made for black feminists trying to quietly coexist in the gaming and comic subcultures. But as the recent GamerGate scandal proved, this can be a culture of sexism and anti-progressivism, and it exists within a larger world that already belittles and diminishes black women specifically. Sammus’ writing converges at the intersection of race, womanhood, sexuality, and nerdiness, doing so with a subtlety lost on most in the subgenre, who rap like they’re mashing every button on a controller at once to do a combo. She’s just as influenced by hardcore nerdcore trailblazer Mega Ran as she is Kanye West. Sammus is a passionate idealist and craft-first poet, penning the kind of wordy marvels that rap annotator types fawn over; she is self-described as “living in the land of keystrokes and passwords/Cheat codes, amiibos, and actors.”On the surface, the reference points for Pieces in Space are obvious and in keeping with the subgenre’s framework, dealing primarily with characters in the geek lexicon: MMOs, Nintendo, Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, and Sega with mentions of Loki, Luke Cage, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Lakitu, and Majin Buu. But a closer reading reveals understated and sharp critiques about the ways we relate in the digital age, and how they often rob us of true connection. In the margins, these themes continuously arise: Talking to Siri when no one will listen, sharing a Netflix account with an ex you never talk to, being attacked by anonymous lynch mobs of trolls and fire-starters in comment sections. It documents life online as a black female gamer, and in turn reveals how the internet is dehumanizing us.On “Comments Disabled,” a tightly-coiled chronicle about the pervasively toxic and antagonistic internet culture that now extends all the way to the White House, Sammus dismantles trolls. “I’m thinking you should invest in collecting a best friend,” she raps, “Who won’t let you press send/To someone you just met/Through Twitter or Sirius XM.” On “Perfect Dark,” she examines the lack of women of color in comics, games, and anime, sending a simple message: black girls want to have heroes, too. Alongside Jean Grae (a skilled lyricist who herself is named after a comic hero), “1080p” finds Sammus writing about the hardships of balancing grad school, an indie rap career, and interpersonal relationships when trying to communicate emotions through phone and computer screens, an idea fittingly conveyed by the concept of seeing things in higher resolution.What unfolds in Pieces in Space is a tale of personal identity and perspective that provides interesting insights on micro and macro scales. Sammus paints a complete and complex self-portrait while exposing truths about the subculture she wades through, and the greater world at large. She’s a ferocious and thoughtful MC whose flows call to mind the solving of a Rubik’s Cube, especially on songs like “Headliner” and “Genius.” Her hooks can leave something to be desired; they’re usually too long-winded and chewy to be earworms, sticking out like sore thumbs. But at any given moment, she’s liable to rattle off a bar like “Gotta spit so sick that you drain Big Pharma/Get your skin so thick you don’t get stigmata” on “Cubicle.” She’s as likely to rap about phosphates and integers as she is to name-check Serena Williams or Emmitt Till. Her delivery is piercing, her perspective refreshing. She ends up becoming the role model she once set out to find.Technically, Fireplace: TheNotTheOtherSide is the debut solo album from Hodgy (née Beats). The Odd Future co-founder has been in the public eye, however, for over half a decade. He’s released six solo mixtapes and EPs, five projects with MellowHype, MellowHigh, and been prominently featured on all three OF group efforts—not to mention the “Sandwitches” verse that landed him on national TV. Still, there’s typically a reason why a rapper calls something an album after years of mixtapes. Even if the distinction is increasingly meaningless, as Drake and Chance the Rapper have both scored Grammy nominations off of releases they insist are “mixtapes,” the implication remains that the “album” is a statement piece. In addition, going solo allows an artist to explore sounds and themes that may not fit into a group’s more established aesthetic—even if Hodgy was the lone MC in MellowHype. In both regards, Hodgy offers nothing new on Fireplace, and brings into question what he offers as an artist with MellowHype dormant and the more powerful collective dissolved.Right off the bat, Hodgy struggles to distance himself from Odd Future. After a brief intro, the first rapper to deliver on the record is Salomon Faye. It’s a move that will instantly ring a bell for OF loyalists—the widest audience for a 2016 Hodgy release—as it’s the same one Earl Sweatshirt pulled on his own debut, Doris, when the shy and sly Sweatshirt let non-rapper SK La’ Flare open his comeback record in one last effort to delay his triumphant return from Samoa. Regardless of intent, Hodgy’s decision to wait his turn on “Kundalini” is a misfire, as he and Faye share tone, pace, and message, making them virtually indistinguishable. There is no contrast or aha moment, just confusion as to why Hodgy would not want to set the tone for his first real album.Non-distinction plagues much of Fireplace. With MellowHype, Hodgy leaned on Left Brain to create the mood. With Left ensuring a consistent vibe, Hodgy was free to express himself with more creative lyrics that rarely explored much, but had great energy. Fireplace lacks any semblance of cohesion in production, which leads to a survey of generic rap beats that ranges from a Clams Casino copycat cut like “Resurrection” to the chopped-up soul of the Knxwledge-produced “Dreaminofthinkin,” which does not fit Hodgy. There is nothing to ground Hodgy on the record, and very few of the instrumentals catch the ear, despite collaborations with big names, like Unknown Mortal Orchestra, BADBADNOTGOOD, Knx, and 88-Keys.Without interesting beats, or at least ones that fit a defined aesthetic, all that’s left is Hodgy’s lyrical ability. To start his career, Hodgy’s greatest asset was that he was not Tyler, the Creator. He could have fun while his comrades screamed vilely, but no longer are they rambunctious teens, and lines like “I’m just like Mike, Mike-WiLL, Miley Cyrus,” and “I’m observing like I’m the fly on the wall, nigga, Pink Floyd” are just bad. The latter is on a track with Busta Rhymes, who upstages Hodgy even while on cruise control, just by varying his flow and delivery. Throughout Fireplace, Hodgy is stuck somewhere among being a punchline rapper, a storyteller, and a moralist. On “They Want,” he raps about institutional racism, and on the closing “DYSLM,” he fights to win back the mother of his son. Otherwise, he does not maintain a consistent message throughout a track, nor does he connect ideas throughout the album. On “Glory,” for example, he declares, “The brightest light my future,” but by “The Now,” he intones, “Don’t be waiting around, go get it time is now.” There are no developments between the two moments that indicate a change in perspective: They remain empty cliches.The only discernible advancement on Fireplace is Hodgy’s continued growth as a singer. It’s a skill he began to flex in earnest on his 2016 mixtapes They Watchin Lofi Series 1 and Dukkha, and it’s quickly become his most pleasant trait. Unfortunately, although no fault of his own, he sounds exactly like Frank Ocean circa Nostalgia, Ultra., and the Odd Future connection certainly doesn’t help in distancing the two. Hodgy’s singing allows him to handle hook duties on his own, but it also amplifies how bad some of the rapping is (“I’ve learned that ball is life, and I’m the goalie” on “Laguna”), knowing he could do so much more with less just by using his own abilities.Fireplace is not even Hodgy’s first release on a major label. MellowHype’s Numbers, MellowHigh, and The OF Tape Vol. 2 all came out on Odd Future’s Sony imprint; even BlackenedWhite got a reissue via Fat Possum. After six attempts and years after the collective’s cultural peak, it’s not clear what made Fireplace the project worth declaring Hodgy’s official debut. The record lacks consistent themes and any set of beliefs beyond scattered attempts at positivity. Musically, it is hardly satisfying, as the fleeting enjoyable moments are swallowed up by a great deal of frustrating mediocrity. Fireplace: TheNotTheOtherSide does not give depth to Hodgy, does not answer why he’s any different now that he’s Beats-less, does not prove that he’s capable of carrying a project on his own. It’s disappointing, considering the potential he showed as a fiery young rapper, but that feeling is perhaps the same reason why Fireplace even exists. Hodgy is a rapper you once knew, and he’s still here for better, but mostly, for worse.What does the concept “slight freedom” mean when you’re a musician like Jeff Parker? Is the qualifier tongue-in-cheek? It’s not like he must hear the word “no” very much. Since the 1990s, as a linchpin of Chicago’s music scene, Parker has developed his singular voice across a variety of contexts. He’s a core member of Tortoise, where his playing often feels like the glue that holds the band together; as a co-founder of the Tortoise spin-off Isotope 217, he tackles looser, spongier strains of jazz-funk. Then there are his sideman gigs—for Toumani Diabaté, Matana Roberts, Meshell Ndegeocello, among many others—and his activities in a number of more traditional jazz ensembles, including his long-running trio with bassist Chris Lopes and drummer Chad Taylor.Even as a frontman, though, Parker is a stealthy player, not a limelight-hugger; he’s known for his restraint and his carefully controlled tone. His uncluttered playing seems to hew to the tenets of Marie Kondo’s The Life-Changing Magic of Tidying Up: “Discard anything that doesn’t spark joy.”This past year has seen Parker moving outward, in multiple directions—filigreeing the edges of Tortoise’s sly, energetic comeback, The Catastrophist; exploring tangled textures and timbres alongside cornetist Rob Mazurek on the album Some Jellyfish Live Forever; and rolling up a decade’s worth of beat sketches on The New Breed, a laid-back set of soul-jazz experiments colored by his recent move to Los Angeles.With Slight Freedom, he tries something new yet again. Unlike The New Breed, where a handful of collaborators helped execute his ideas, Slight Freedom, his first totally solo album, is all Parker. He recorded everything live in the studio with no overdubs, using a Boomerang Phrase Sampler to layer loops and drones in real time. But where some users of looping pedals are prone to building up towering stacks of tone, Parker’s restraint still prevails. He constructs the title track like a spider spinning its web: Using a dubby, percussive pattern as the main support, he lays down fine, almost invisible fibers—seemingly wispy yet deceptively sturdy—that are more structural than ornamental. There are no wasted motions. Yet the whole, which seems to hang in mid-air, glistening, remains deeply expressive, despite its extreme economy.“Slight Freedom” sets the tone for the whole album. All four songs, including a drowsy instrumental cover of Frank Ocean’s “Super Rich Kids” and a loosely woven instrumental version of Billy Strayhorn’s “Lush Life,” are quiet, atmospheric mood studies that tend to conceal more than they reveal. Sometimes it seems as if Parker is intent upon hiding behind his own shadow: In “Super Rich Kids,” his muted, almost bossa nova-like plucks are nearly obscured by sounds pouring in through an open window: braking buses, car horns, the occasional burst of police siren, terse and menacing. A similar kind of veiling happens on “Lush Life,” in which a dull electrical hum stretches from beginning to end, masking the contours of Parker’s tremolo-soaked guitar with faint dissonance. Parker’s take on the standard is bittersweet, almost resigned; from time to time, the melody reluctantly pokes its head out from beneath the chords, but mostly the song dwells in an all-consuming fog—a perfect evocation of Strayhorn’s hungover and heartbroken narrator, slumped against the bar in some seedy dive.“Mainz,” on the other hand, gives Parker his chance to shine—at least, within the spare framework he has set up for himself. It’s hardly acrobatic, but the song’s unusual time signature, which switchbacks between 13/8 and 12/8, is as tricky as it is lithe. In his trio’s 2012 recording of the Chad Taylor composition, the band closes out the song by locking into a slow, driving groove, but here he takes a considerably different tack: The song’s final five minutes are just pure, shimmering held tones and softly droning feedback.It turns out that some of the album’s most striking moments are those, like this one, where the least is happening. In the opening “Slight Freedom,” the principal theme is eventually swallowed up into a luminous bath of tone, and for six more minutes he proceeds to gently stir it, eking quiet mini-melodies out of the swirl. It’s not jazz, it’s not ambient, it’s not noise; it’s something more idiosyncratic and more personal, something only Parker could have come up with. Perhaps this is what “slight freedom” is supposed to mean: Not an anarchic exploding of rules, not the total liberation proposed by free jazz, but a steadier, stealthier path—dissolving boundaries, softening constraints, and wearing away at the edges of things until the ideas run as freely as water.“Making a song from alpha to omega is challenging,” A-Trak told Forbes last November. “It's from a song that has already worked in some capacity. You're taking a piece of something that is already catchy at in some way and you are decorating it with your production.” Perceiving the art of the remix as mere decoration might be anathema for its finest practitioners—be they François K., Ricardo Villalobos, or Puff— but in ’00s dance culture, A-Trak’s work and sensibilities served as an amped-up gateway for a new generation. Whether they checked his Soundcloud because of his connection to Kanye, because they loved southern hip-hop but not Ed Banger (or vice versa), or because of festival-friendly remixes of big indie rock acts, A-Trak’s work ethic blurred genre lines. Culling a decade of remixes (with over 180 remix credits to his name), the lavish In the Loop 6x7” box set marks the first time that many of these digital-only remixes have been available in a physical format rather than Beatport-only download. The opening remix of Architecture in Helsinki’s “Heart It Races” (back when A-Trak still used the handle Trizzy) showed that from the start A-Trak had a knack for tearing down the mid-’00s walls between indie rock, mainstream hip-hop and electronic dance music. He takes Neptunes-type drum stutters, adds hip-hop backspins, a touch of steel pan and keeps the noxious yip of vocals intact, yet it all winds up sticking together.Listening to all these remixes at once reveals that A-Trak often tried to please everyone, and his knack for picking over myriad genres often meant he felt the need to shoehorn everything in with each remix opportunity. His remix of Scanners’ “Bombs” is the equivalent of a dogpile: compressed rock guitar stabs, multiple sped-up vocal samples saying “drop,” rave synth swoops, voices minced until they become hiccups and then—why the hell not?—some cowbell dumped on for good measure, as if to make sure every box gets ticked.His remix of Sébastian Tellier’s “Kilometer” seems similarly intent on touching on every trend in French dance music. A-Trak filters the kick down to a muffled throb redolent of “Around the World,” before bringing in a swell of disco symphonic strings and electro squelch, ranging from Ed Banger filter house to Daft Punk then back to Québécois disco. Similar sensibilities get applied to Phoenix’s “Trying to Be Cool” as he builds the opening keyboard figure into something bombastic. Visit a section of the song that doesn't have Thomas Mars’ telltale voice and one would be hard-pressed to distinguish it from any other track of the past decade.What A-Trak delivers in spades is big, simple pleasures. For Boys Noize’s “Oh!,” he devastates with little more than that titular shout, vocodered growls, dancehall sirens and a feverish beat. He wasn’t the first one to have a go at the Yeah Yeah Yeahs late-period dance move of “Heads Will Roll,” but his remix is undeniable. Jacking up Nick Zinner’s tepid goth synth stabs until it’s brawny enough to fill a Coachella tent, he cuts away the band’s ineffective rock moves and instead replaces it all with leaner electronic components. A-Trak remakes Karen O into an icy electro queen, surrounding her with only the finest fromage: lasers, claps, 303 squelches and gaudy builds.Give him the keys to another Brooklyn dancepunk band though—in this instance the Rapture— and the same tricks don’t pan out. On the piano-house-meets-gospel glory of “How Deep is Your Love,” A-Trak doesn't have the patience to give the song time to unfurl, shortening the song by a third, getting right to the dramatic build and then adding heaps of neon and rave lights. For the remarkable range of artists that In the Loop displays, A-Trak’s ability to mash together different genres and sounds into a crowd-pleasing amalgam also means that—much like a great night out—the distinguishing characteristics blur together into an undifferentiated mass.Native State, the 2014 debut record by Jess Williamson, depicted the Texan singer/songwriter’s journey back to her home state from a stint living in NYC, ditching the city and its discomforts for the wide-open country of her heart. Driven largely by banjo and other folksy instruments like dobro and dulcimer, Native State’s sound lumped Williamson into a loose constellation of mournful, folksy musicians, despite the fact that her spindly, spine-tingling voice took her songs in places most of her supposed peers would never dare to go. But Heart Song, Williamson’s sophomore effort, raises the question of how native Native State really was, as it finds her ditching bucolic Americana and returning to a place of urban malaise that feels far more natural for her.What remains unchanged is Williamson’s stunning voice, which remains as compelling and remarkable as it was on Native State. Her rich, lip-curled contralto has an uncanny familiarity to it, hitting a spot somewhere between Cat Power and Angel Olsen, with moments of early Joanna Newsom’s yawp. But the way she wields this voice is unique. On Native State, that voice often seemed set off in opposition to the rustic instrumentation, but on Heart Song everything seems fused together as one.Her writing, while evocative in any setting, feels more suited to these ominous all-night-diner/on-the-road soundtracks than to porch-mystic musings. Opener “Say It” captures this transition well, conjuring a quasi-Lynchian vision of a weary, wary woman conversing with a lover: “We could do better than this cheap motel/But somehow here I feel the most like myself.” On the slowly unfolding and percussion-less “Snake Song”—which references Will Oldham’s apocalyptic folkie forbearer Palace Brothers with the lyric “There is no one what will take care of you”—Williamson offers the sharp line “I have made friends with those too jealous to let the love come in/And I’ll never talk to them again even if I again talk to them.” Each track relies heavily on reverb-soaked electric guitar lines, a stark simplicity that works in tandem with Williamson’s soaring, interrogative voice.The atmosphere on Heart Song is so strong and captivating that it pulls the more experimental moments into the center as well, like the mariachi deathsong closer “Devil’s Girl.” The best first-person storytelling manages to exist both inside and outside of the narrator’s head, a state which Williamson achieves deftly with cleverly written—and most importantly, delivered—lines such as “It’s evil how the best men I know are in and out of hospitals/Fighting some devils/…. Well maybe I am just the devil’s girl.” “Devil’s Girl” is actually an older song of Williamson’s, but the music been recast for Heart Song, scrapping the previous bluegrass/folk trappings in place of something rawer and more emotive.At only seven tracks, Heart Song feels almost too brief. Its ghostly instrumentation and measured pace distort your sense of time in a manner similar to stark classics like Songs: Ohia’s Didn’t It Rain. Williamson has evolved subtly over her two records, and Heart Song lifts her finally and definitely out of the world of “folk” into something deeper, more uncanny, and out-of-time. Heart Song never tires nor loses its tension, as if Williamson’s voice has finally found its proper milieu.Kevin Abstract just happens to rap; in another era, he would have been an endearing alt-rock frontman. Only 20 years old, Abstract is a member of the self-described “All-American Boy Band” BROCKHAMPTON, and he travelled much of his childhood before recently settling out in Los Angeles. American Boyfriend, his sophomore album, holds onto the theme of constant movement as Abstract situates himself in a nameless high school in an unknown city, where he fantasizes about football players. His lyrical specificity is reserved for people: “Showed me obscure bands he was into/His mom was in the dining room, we’re in his bedroom,” he raps on “Seventeen,” as he describes afternoons spent with an unrequited crush.  He’s almost old enough to drink, but Abstract’s world here is for kids who are barely old enough to drive. His last project MTV1987 teased out tendrils of post-Odd Future Tumblr rap, harsh production, strained parental relationships, and sexually frustrated lyrics; American Boyfriend removes that youthful angst. He no longer chastises past lovers, but rather turns inwards to investigate what he even wants out of romantic relationships. “Can’t tell my family I’m bi/Can’t tell my mother I’m gay/The hardest part of my day/Is wishing I was fucking straight,” he raps on the album’s centerpiece “Papercut.” Where MTV1987 spoke down to women, the boys on American Boyfriend open Abstract’s eyes to new worlds and sides of himself. Only a year between projects, Abstract’s music is now imbued with a freeness and warmth that was previously only hinted at in his music.Michael Uzowuru, an executive producer on American Boyfriend, who also worked on Frank Ocean’s Blonde (“Nights”) and Endless (“Rushes To”), helped bring Ocean’s genre-blurred vision to Abstract’s work. But, where Frank’s ideas languorously stretched the boundaries of traditional pop songwriting, Abstract’s are more frantic. At 16 tracks long and clocking under under 40 minutes, the album still dips into a few too many ideas. “Suburban Born” and “Runner” meander needlessly, where the wistful acoustic guitar and falsetto of the angelic “Yellow” speak to the same struggle of opposite poles of self-confidence and self-doubt. That moment, along with “American Boyfriend,” inches towards a Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness B-side territory. He doesn’t reach Billy Corgan’s dramatics, but it is encouraging to watch him reach.Two years ago, Abstract wrote an open letter to Childish Gambino, where he described himself as “too black for the whites and too white for the blacks.” American Boyfriend appears to find Abstract still struggling through those issues of his high school days, as he places himself back inside those hallways and bleachers that made him feel like such an outsider. Even before Glover’s critically beloved TV show “Atlanta” and the surprise funk turn of “Awaken, My Love”, his inward-facing persona offered a direction for black kids like Abstract, who felt too removed from the ego of rap’s biggest stars. Abstract’s myth-building isn’t meant to occupy a stadium tour or a floating stage setup, but instead for the kids alone in class needing something to by another day.  The freedom of abandoning rap’s default confidence stance gives American Boyfriend an almost twee preciousness, Abstract isn’t afraid to swim freely in his emotions. On “Miserable America,” Abstract speaks about his mother’s homophobia and the racism of his boyfriend’s parents, as he mournfully observes, “They love gays, but they hate niggas.” Even in the familial and romantic relationships that should provide comfort, Abstract instead finds irresolvable identity conflicts. American Boyfriend can feel a bit scattered and unsure, but it’s an album seeking love in a world now primed to find new angles for hate. For that reason alone, it feels welcome. As half of Gatekeeper, Aaron David Ross produced dizzying, over-the-top synth experiments, full of conceptual knots. His 2015 solo release under the name ADR was similarly dense, an exploration of life within networks that mimicked the spiraling disjunct of online life. With THROAT, he delivers something more distilled. Maybe the most conventionally listenable release of his career, its smoother productions serve as subtler—even insidious—vehicles for his ideas about communication and mediation.The conceptual twist here is that the album is composed of vocal samples, most scrubbed clean of any signifiers of human origin. Remembering this as you listen can be amusing, even creepy, and the overall effect is that of a futuristic gloss, each sourced note subsumed into a larger whole. Ross has built these abstract fragments into all-but-seamless collages that climb, flutter, and drop in accordance with the rules of pop songwriting, but what’s constructed here has no singular voice, no characters, no storytelling—indeed, no language, at least not in the traditional sense, though occasionally a voice will float out in an unintelligible lead. Still, these tracks brim with feeling, or feeling’s synthetic analog.Where his previous work tended to assault the listener, here there’s a sense of being swept up or carried—a more elegant transaction, but still one that requires the listener to cede power. On opener “Every Node,” Ross weaves bubbly melodies into a hopeful chorus, developing into a sort of call-and-response over a whispered R&B beat; “Lost Ya” supplements a bassline full of chipper indifference with wistful pitched-up interludes. Musically, the effect isn’t so far off from the high-definition, high-anxiety likes of Holly Herndon, Katie Gately, or, dare I say, PC Music—music that strives to sound ultra-contemporary. Especially within this focused palette, Ross’ hyper-detailed approach to composition comes into crystalline focus. As pop producers do, he’s plumbing and deploying an array of styles here, from classical choral arrangements to polyrhythms to, on “King David,” what sounds like a muddled take on the “Ha Dance” break. But he’s also a student of a certain breed of outsized radio-EDM; Jack Ü comes to mind. The implication is that while such music succeeds because of how intensely legible it feels, this belies a dangerous lack of genuine content to communicate.Ross’s project might be dystopian at its core, revealing us to be floating a little too comfortably in the cybermuck that builds up invisibly between sender and receiver. But his choruses still speak, in their own strange and affecting ways—I think, for example, of the plaintive solemnity of “Advice,” or “Effort,” in which danceable ambivalence gives way to a sample that’s been blown out into a cathartic machine scream, not unlike something you’d hear in a Linkin Park song. The structures of communication twist and splinter, but we can still sense a constant longing.There aren’t many electronic dance musicians more cantankerous than deadmau5. His beefs are legion, his tweetstorms legendary. And the scrawny, tattooed Torontonian’s self-loathing is nearly as famous as his short fuse. Sometimes, the self-deprecating potshots—making fun of his own costume, admitting that most EDM performances are pure pantomime—scan as refreshingly down-to-earth takes on an industry full of metastasized egos and virtually no self-awareness. But sometimes, his snark takes a darker tone. Just a year ago, he threatened that he was thinking about “killing off” the deadmau5 “bullshit” and starting over. “fuck it. why not,” he tweeted, sounding not unlike a man standing on the railing of a bridge.But where many neurotic artists’ work actively benefits from their neuroses, the same can’t necessarily be said of deadmau5, aka Joel Zimmerman. His music isn’t without its strengths: It can be catchy and immersive, and it’s remarkably well-engineered, packed with satisfying oomph and spine-tingling timbres. And for all the shit that deadmau5 has gotten for being, well, deadmau5, his music has often been markedly less corny than 99% of mainstream EDM. The best deadmau5 tracks burrow into the kind of long, dark groove that has characterized four-to-the-floor dance music since the very beginning; for listeners, they’re more about losing yourself in the beat than gawking at the bozo onstage. (That’s ironic, given his mouse-head gimmick.) Nevertheless, his music tends to be relatively uncomplicated, conflict- and friction-free—in short, far more polite that you’d expect from a guy who smokes like a chimney, swears like a sailor, and, you know, wears a gigantic, light-up cartoon mouse head on stage.Perhaps it’s this disconnect between his music and his persona that led deadmau5 to trash his latest album upon its release. “i don’t even like it,” he tweeted. “it was like... so fucking rushed / slapped together.” Later, despite “orders from above” not to bad-mouth his own work, he explained to Rolling Stone that it wasn’t written “from start to finish; it’s over a year’s worth of work that doesn’t correlate. It's not The fucking Wall!” (Remarkably, this isn’t the first time he’s criticized one of his own records in almost identical language. Of 2012’s >album title goes here<, he lamented the fact that his “tour-heavy year” had stood in the way of him sitting down and making something “from start to finish like The Wall.”)Still, the album isn’t without its pleasures. The opening “4ware” is wistful and driving, with a pinging lead reminiscent of Eric Prydz or Gui Boratto’s progressive trance. The nu-disco number “Cat Thruster” manages the perfect balance of slouching cool and giddy kitsch, playing legato synth riffs and ersatz electric bass off harp flourishes and clever chord changes; if someone told you it was a new Todd Terje tune, you probably wouldn’t bat an eye. And the grinding “Deus Ex Machina” sounds a lot like the kind of gravelly, psychedelic techno that Robag Wruhme and the Wighnomy Brothers used to be known for.Some songs are more lackluster. Both “2448” and “No Problem” tear pages from the Daft Punk playbook, but the former wastes a perfectly good synth riff on a formulaic big-room stomp whose slow rise in pitch mimics a trick he already tried on 2010’s “Bad Selection,” while the heavy-handed touch of the latter tune makes Justice’s most lunkheaded jams look like surgical implements. And the unrequited-love song “Let Go” aims for bittersweet release, but it gets hung up on the earnest-yet-anodyne vocals of the young singer and producer Grabbitz. Even on some of the stronger tracks, Zimmerman seems to be going through the motions. His synthesizers have never sounded richer, but once introduced, his sounds don’t morph and his themes don’t evolve; loops simply loop, unvarying and uninflected, and once a track gets through its obligatory mid-way breakdown, there's really no point in sticking around for three or four minutes of reprise. His drums, meanwhile, favor cleanliness over character; the disco-leaning “Cat Thruster” has more to do with abstract ideas of disco than the music’s actual essence.What’s most frustrating is that Zimmerman clearly has it in him to make a better, more exciting record. “Glish,” a three-way merger between IDM, digi-dub, and skweee, could pass for Aphex Twin, and “Snowcone” is a perfectly serviceable Boards of Canada tribute—not a goal in and of itself, necessarily, but at least a stepping stone toward greener pastures. Best of all is “Whelk Then,” which mixes thundering breakbeats and glistening synths until they swirl like the interior of a snowglobe. Finally, here on the album’s penultimate cut—it would have made for a killer close if they hadn't tacked on an unnecessary, 12-minute edit of “Let Go”—we’re given a sense of what one suspects Zimmerman really wants to do. So why isn’t he doing it? What's strange about W:/2016ALBUM/ is that it’s Zimmerman's first album since buying himself out of his contract with EMI; in theory, that means he should finally be beholden to no one but himself. Yet he still sounds like he’s hemmed in by others’ expectations of what deadmau5 is supposed to deliver, and who deadmau5 is supposed to be. Maybe it really is time for him to build a better mousetrap once and for all, and see what happens next. To cap off a busy 2016, in which she released and toured behind her sophomore effort Oh No, Jessy Lanza dropped the Oh No No No Remixes EP. On Oh No, co-produced with label mate Jeremy Greenspan of Junior Boys, Lanza explored a breadth of genres from pop to new wave on the way to establishing her own neatly curated sound—one that thrives in the overlap between electronica and R&B. She explored the angst of romantic entanglement usually associated with the latter genre, but her penchant for vibrant synthpop melodies and stuttering drum patterns transformed anguish into a danceable incentive.  Just as it says on the tin, this EP puts a new spin on three tracks from the album: “I Talk BB,” “Could B U,” and “Going Somewhere.” The remixes come courtesy of former collaborators and tourmates DJ Taye and DJ Spinn of Chicago footwork crew Teklife, Morgan Geist aka Storm Queen, and Leon Smart as DVA [Hi:Emotions].While Oh No leaned into the chaotic musings about a budding romance, the EP soundtracks the left-brain, logical analysis. Geist adds a light touch to “I Talk BB,” brightening up the album version with synths and a drum machine. Lanza’s breathy falsetto from the original serves as an instrument on the remix, blending in with the beat rather than standing apart. This holds true when “Could Be U,” the ambient outro to Oh No, is given the Teklife treatment by DJs Taye and Spinn. There are brief hints of Lanza’s voice over a subdued but frenetic drum pattern, which is similar in tone to the original despite the slight increase in tempo, but it seems like she’s not necessarily the star of her own EP. The remixes don’t pounce at the chance to celebrate the upper reaches of her voice—used often, instead of the modal register, to express uncertainty and anxiety on the originals.This point is hammered home on the final track, DVA [Hi:Emotions]’ take on “Going Somewhere,” one of the more upbeat compositions on Oh No that also highlights Lanza’s range, removes her vocal almost entirely. For seven and a half minutes, the track plays out like the audio from some kind of immersive art installation, interpolating snippets of Kim Kardashian’s voice with haunting synth lines and R2-D2-esque droid sounds that mimic most reality shows' warped relationship with the truth (“I just wanna impress you,” Lanza repeats, a relatable impulse that can turn psychotic if it becomes a compulsion).The Oh No No No Remixes EP makes for good ambiance, but they don't say much on their own. They set a relaxed mood, and they function as a mellow, cohesive mini-supplement to the album. But the EP is more of a showcase for Lanza’s collaborators and less a celebration of her voice and everything that made Oh No so good. It’s likely that fans of the latter record, where her songwriting and vocal talent take center stage, will stick with it instead.Composer Peter Broderick has spent the past ten years crafting consistently strong post-classical music, but on last August’s piano-only Partners he seemed to uncover a new gravitas and substance in his limpid, clear language. The inherent challenge with producing minimalistic music is figuring out how to infuse humanity and new ideas into work with only a handful of notes, and to avoid a reliance on vacant “prettiness.” On Partners, Broderick’s music remained stirring and evocative, but there was something new in it: a deeper injection of his personality, and a larger sense of how that plays into his relationship with his own compositions. Now, just a few months later, he returns with follow-up EP Grunewald, but rather than continue to expand on Partners’ developments, it sees him returning to the less vital, more ephemeral work of his past.To be clear, Grunewald is less of a regression for Broderick than an amiable walk down memory lane. This graceful-but-slight release collects five tracks previously issued across two discs (one Japanese, one Taiwanese) that were taken from a single day’s live recording in Berlin. Grunewald takes its name from a beloved local church which functioned as a hub for other Berlin-based experimentalists from the Erased Tapes label constellation like Nils Frahm, seeming to provide inspiration for all those who passed its door, including Broderick here. As a result, Grunewald is Broderick’s way of marking the importance of both the place and time in the lives of him and the other musicians who’ve been impacted by it.  Like Partners, Grunewald is an entirely solo effort, featuring Broderick unaccompanied on piano, violin, and—on the opener “Goodnight”—a bit of vocals. Broderick’s use of his voice on Partners provided one of that album’s highlights, an arresting cover of Irish folk singer Brigid Mae Power’s “Sometimes.” On “Goodnight,” one of four piano-only numbers, he doesn’t quite sing as much as moan and coo on top of slow, plaintively struck chords. Broderick’s instincts for when to use vocals to enrich his minimalist performances are strong—sometimes he will even drop in a snippet of conversational speech, such as on Partners’ “Sometimes.” But the instrumentation of “Goodnight” is so bare and simple as to make it a trivial confection, more ambience than song. “Violin Solo, No. 1,” positioned as the middle of five tracks, provides another nice textural break amidst the four piano tracks, but is no more than advertised—a nice and brief minor key solo on violin.The dark-night journey “Low Light” and the reflective “Eyes Closed and Traveling” offer entrancing melodies and more depth than “Goodnight,” but Grunewald’s clear highlight is “It’s a Storm When I Sleep.” Buoyed by Broderick’s thundering take on Alberti-style bass, he produces a cacophonous-yet-soothing drone that carries on for nearly eight minutes. A shorter version would have been interesting on its own, but stretched out here, it becomes formidable, challenging, and meditative. Though marooned amidst the lighter pieces here, it is suggestive of some of the new directions Broderick would take in making the leap from “pretty” to “profound.”Dawn of Midi’s 2013 album Dysnomia merged genres with ease. Members of modern jazz, contemporary classical, and electronic scenes all celebrated the trio’s memorable grooves and motifs. The exuberance of experimental dance music was easy to identify in this acoustic group’s sound. But another quality of that debut recording was its sense of control, particularly when dealing with ambient aesthetics.Since 2013, the group’s drummer, Qasim Naqvi, has continued to work in the contemporary classical sphere. On the NNA Tapes imprint, he released a set of chamber music (performed by a student ensemble). On his latest EP, he plays and composes on a vintage Moog synthesizer—an instrument similar to the one used by Wendy Carlos on the landmark 1968 LP Switched-on Bach. Taken individually, the six pieces on Chronology dispense small-scale hits of gorgeousness. In tandem, the tracks cohere to form a compelling suite of pieces that can subtly undermine expectations for ambient-influenced composition. Since this early Moog model was a monophonic synthesizer, capable of producing just a single melodic line at any given time, Naqvi had to multitrack his chords and harmonic designs. But this is done so subtly, the tracks all retain the feel of an intimate performance; it’s as though everything was triggered in one ruminative take.On the opener, “Kindly Static,” Naqvi loops a single Moog tone. He turns this into an affecting minimalist composition by switching up playback speeds. Each droning note creates a new equilibrium, while the often slow pitch-bends in between carry a more reluctant, vulnerable feel. On the title track—the longest piece, which serves as the album’s emotional climax—Naqvi layers the sonic information in performances that employ different oscillators. Sometimes this results in a mellow, church-organ feel; at other points, harsher combinations provide a dramatic edge. It’s a slow-moving piece, but rich with activity.Though it isn’t beat-focused, Chronology also has a connection with trends in electronic music that informed Dysnomia. On “Aftertouched,” another piece that uses multichannel playback trickery, Naqvi creates unpredictable rhythmic patterns from consistent harmonies. Because this particular Moog instrument was (in the composer’s words) “kind of janky,” there are stretches where you can hear signal noise in the mix, or else tones that seem less stable than others. But there’s nothing haphazard about the finished product. In “Head Within a Head,” the use of deep, floor-rattling blips works well alongside the instrument’s eccentricities. And the tone clusters that drive “Mt. Erased” have a chattering, jittery air. It’s the contrast between these pieces and the more tranquil compositions that gives Chronology its range—and its sense of purpose.“White Iverson” is not a foundational brick; it is a sandcastle on a windy day with a high tide. No one who appreciated the breezy distraction of a radio song in 2015 wanted to hear nearly 70 minutes of Post Malone a year later. There are new one-hit wonders to enjoy; there are pop icons making important works; there’s probably a book somewhere worth reading.The song was charming, though: Through the haze of its production and Post Malone’s slurred delivery was a certain nostalgic desire and childlike wonder. Somehow, he hopped on a tour with Justin Bieber, and Universal subsidiary Republic Records believed that Stoney, a 68-minute long dirge, was the correct use of his talents. Even if you liked “White Iverson,” was there anyone who thought to themselves, I want to hear this guy’s story! What’s he all about? We need to know more!? For all of Stoney’s faults, its most damning one poisons the record at the source: This thing is completely soulless.It’s not for a lack of trying, however—Post Malone (real name: Austin Post) is presenting his most authentic self here, talking openly about relationships and taking too many drugs and drinking a little too much, amidst numerous “we made it” anthems. But he’s simply not a compelling artist; he doesn’t say anything new about these struggles, doesn’t frame them in a particularly memorable way, and has nothing to say now that he’s wrestled with his fame. What pushes Stoney past being merely forgettable and into a kind of cynical, punishing listen is the access to a bunch of producers and songwriters that came together behind the 21 year old to ensure a product so highly polished, and so clearly connect-the-dots, it robs him of any trace of charm. The album ends up doubling as a tacit acknowledgment that, hey, maybe this guy is just not that interesting.If it’s lowlights you want, Stoney’s got them: “I Fall Apart” brutally crashes the party, appearing right after “White Iverson.” The song is full of acoustic guitars, and features Post’s most obnoxious crutch: that weird little vibrato thing he does, a vain attempt to convey emotion. “I Fall Apart,” a self-lacerating breakup anthem, recalls Staind, working that same woe-is-me white boy pain with an unpleasant voice slathered all over it. “Go Flex” boasts a foot-stomp chorus and enough echo to sound exactly like the Lumineers or any other faceless “whoa-oh-oh” band; it’s as unholy as it sounds on paper.Stoney indulges in a few huge, expertly written, admittedly catchy hooks, but since Post doesn’t have a strong voice and is usually not saying much more than cliches, many of these faux-triumphant songs sound tailor-made for headphone commercials. See: “Congratulations,” with a “let me collect this check” Quavo appearance, or “Too Young,” a song that’s probably about a year old, and already in line to appear on the soundtrack for the next movie about a white boxer.To its credit, Stoney lets its best run of songs loose near the beginning of the album, after turgid opener “Broken Whiskey Glass.” “Big Lie” has a nice, booming DJ Mustard beat, sounding like something that could’ve been on ANTI or SremmLife 2, and one of the record’s strongest hooks, mostly because it plays into the same kind of sleepy-eyed charm of “White Iverson.” The baroque beats on songs like “Déjà Vu,” with Justin Bieber, and the Pharrell-assisted “Up There,” are begging for someone with a little more humor to show up, maybe Young Thug or any of the under-21 Atlanta guys. Still, Post Malone finds those grooves nicely, and they are the least burdensome songs on the record.I have a perhaps wishfully optimistic hope that Stoney could mark the end of a specific kind of rap album: the spiffy cash-in after the viral hit or mixtape run. Post feels like the flimsiest artist yet to get this treatment, and he got such an extravagant treatment at that. With a recent era of mixtape rappers on the decline, along with the steady hemorrhaging of album sales and bigger names taking bigger risks, it seems as if this type of hollow release could soon become as anachronistic as an $18 CD is today.Put on nearly any of the 36 discs in Bob Dylan’s The 1966 Live Recordings box set and it will probably be perfect. Capturing the songwriter at the crest of his magical ’60s peak and culminating with a series of exhilarating performances in Manchester, Paris, and London, the imposing block of music documents Dylan facing down confrontational audiences while making some of the most ambitious creative leaps of his career. Causing controversy in some quarters by playing electric guitar in front of a rock band and seemingly abandoning his topical political songwriting, the shows depict an ongoing battle between Dylan and self-righteously betrayed folkies. Debuting material from the not-yet-released Blonde on Blonde alongside recent hits and new electrified arrangements of old tunes, Dylan is luminous and fragile-sounding during his opening solo acoustic sets, and equally fierce and possessed during the electric second halves, backed by the quintet that would soon become the Band, who match him in super-charged vitality. A classic tour from start to finish, the set’s only drawbacks owe more to the format than the music: Various incomplete or missing songs, a few over-saturated vocal tracks, five CDs worth of grotty audience tapes, and the fact that Dylan performs nearly the same set lists in nearly the same order at every stop of the tour, from Long Island to Stockholm. Thoroughly consistent, especially by Dylan’s later live standards, the repeated performances from the 22 represented shows might be seen as feature, not a bug. Listening to oblique narrative epics like “Visions of Johanna” and dense truth attacks like “Leopard-Skin Pill-Box Hat” over and over, each becomes like a sculpture viewed from different angles, each liable to reveal something new about the lyrics or melody or interplay between musicians. The 1966 Live Recordings builds itself around discs 19 and 20, a long-bootlegged show from Manchester officially released in 1998. Containing the notorious back-and-forth in which an audience member calls Dylan “Judas!” and Dylan snarls back, "I don’t be-lieve you, you’re a liar" (and to the musicians “play fuckin’ loud”), the Manchester show also finds the just-exactly-perfect balance of performance, soundman Richard Alderson’s mix, and high drama. Listened to in the context of the gigs on either side of it, one hears Dylan and the Group (as they were capitalized at the time in the British music press) circling around the tempos and inflections of what would become the classic performance of the material.But each disc—even the barely listenable audience recordings—has its own rewards for the committed Dylanologist, from on- and off-stage histrionics to a range of varied mixes, each with its own personality. Turning 25 on May 24th in Paris (discs 26 and 27), Dylan goes into near meltdown, attempting desperately to get his acoustic instrument in tune. “This never happens to my electric guitar,” he deadpans, a punchline deployed many nights, part prop theater (“This machine confuses fascists”), part a musician's nightmare of gear damaged in transit. Slurring his words, Dylan is deeply inside of both himself and his songs, his Woody Guthrie drawl blurred into the oft-caricatured nasal howl. One takeaway, though, and perhaps the perpetual Dylan hot take, is that the dude actually is an amazing singer, lingering sensuously on every syllable during the quiet acoustic sets and occupying every bit of smarter-than-thou word-play and put-downs when the electric guitars come out. “It takes a lot of medicine to keep up this pace,” Dylan told journalist Robert Shelton that year, and various accounts (including those of liner-notes writer Clinton Heylin) hint at Dylan’s prodigious chemical intake during his extended world tour in 1966. Dylan had been touring in the electric/acoustic format since the previous summer, cramming in studio sessions between an extended fall tour with his new accompanists. The former backing group for Arkansas-born rockabilly singer Ronnie Hawkins, the ex-Hawks played 60 gigs with Dylan in the fall of 1965 and spring of 1966, drummer Levon Helm bailing in late November, before the start of Dylan's first world tour in 1966. Helm and others can be heard on the scant fall ’65 audience tapes released as downloads last year, and Sandy Konikoff can be made out (barely) on the audience-recorded discs from the American leg, stuck rightfully at the end of this set. But it’s the hard-hitting Mickey Jones (later seen in bearded form as neighbor Pete Bilker on ABC’s “Home Improvement”) who galvanizes the band from April of 1966 onward, providing gun-shot snare-cracks to start songs and a dependably rolling thunder. “In my group, the drummer is the lead guitar player,” Dylan would tell a press conference a quarter-century later, and Jones totally wails.Often dismissed in the British music papers, the Group was anything but typical, owing especially to the double piano/organ attack of Richard Manuel and Garth Hudson. Filling the corners of each song with soulful R&B color and sometimes lost in the mix, Manuel can be heard especially on the May 14th show in Liverpool (disc 14), adding on boogie-woogie filigrees to “Baby, Let Me Follow You Down.” Though Hudson's solos are few and far between, one of the recurring pleasures of the box comes with his conversational fills between vocal lines every night on “Ballad of a Thin Man,” with Dylan taking over for Manuel at piano. Perhaps the keynote for the entire period, Dylan milks the tune for every last insult.With Jones driving them, Manuel, Hudson, Danko, and lead guitarist Robbie Robertson make room for one another, all while heeding Dylan’s urgent rhythm playing, an electrified bandleader for barely six months by the time of the box set’s chronological opening on February 5th in White Plains. Climaxing all sets but one with “Like A Rolling Stone”—a #4 hit in the UK the previous year, #2 back home—was almost a joke in itself, a reminder that none of this electricity should be any sort of surprise. With most of the violent upheavals of the ’60s still building towards a fever pitch, Dylan had gradually moved away from overt topicality beginning with 1964’s Another Side of Bob Dylan, adding electric instruments to the mix for 1965’s Bringing It All Back Home. And, every night, “Like A Rolling Stone” makes a thrilling conclusion, Dylan yawping out the vocals, Robertson and pals transforming the sparkle of the 1965 studio rendition into an ethereal punch. Speaking almost entirely in parables in interviews and press conferences, the Bob Dylan that stood in front of audiences in 1966 had an unearthly air, a beautiful and vibrating young alien. “Bob Dylan got very sick backstage and I’m here to take his place,” he announces in Glasgow (disc 21), but whoever it is that's wearing the Bob Dylan mask positively glows. The folkies were right, of course, in that he and his lyrics had drifted far from topical concerns, replacing them with a personal expression that spoke more to the abstract intellectual autonomy of the counterculture than the ongoing issues of the New Left. But sharpened even beyond that, the acoustic sets possess a stark beauty, like a series of elegant black-and-white portraits. It would be the last time Dylan regularly performed extended solo acoustic sets, and it is a form he has mastered. Finding a subtlety in his harmonica playing, it ranges from spare melodic statements like the introduction to “Fourth Time Around” to more abstract honkings (such as the concluding solos in “Desolation Row”) perhaps more akin to what soundman Richard Alderson had recorded as house engineer at avant-garde label ESP’-Disk. At times, such as on the terrible February 5th audience tape from the Westchester County Center in New York, Dylan squonks up and down the harp for comedic value, but mostly it’s an instrument as weird and pliable as Dylan’s voice.The long-haul listening experience of 29.5 hours of music provides able space for contemplation, a manner of observing Dylan’s work in real time, hearing him earn giggles for his then-unreleased “Norwegian Wood” answer song “Fourth Time Around” in Sheffield (disc 17) and endlessly tweak the work-in-progress electric set opener “Tell Me, Momma” at every stop of the tour. Dylan doesn’st settle on a single set of lyrics throughout the 20 surviving performances of this song, which was never recorded in a studio; the official lyrics in his published lyrics book (and on his website) bear only fragmentary resemblance to any version documented on the box set. A lost classic, never performed again after 1966, each version flashes by in a perfect torrent of Dylan-esque babble, as if he were scribbling in a notebook, trying out endless variations. To Dylan, his sets with this Group seemed to represent the next step in his work. Though only Robbie Robertson featured on Blonde on Blonde, in stores a few weeks after the tour concluded, Dylan would rush-release the Liverpool recording of “Just Like Tom Thumb’s Blues” as the B-side of the last pre-album single, “I Want You.” In addition to spending post-show time with the Group and his entourage reviewing Alderson’s recordings, Dylan continued to work off-hours on even more new songs, with a half-dozen fragments of hotel songwriting sessions with Robertson included on last year’s The Cutting Edge, almost all abandoned after the tour. Operating at high speed in every regard, Dylan’s career would take a major turn after a motorcycle accident in Woodstock in July, canceling the next legs of the tour, eschewing live performance until 1969, and staying off the road until 1974. The 1966 Live Recordings, then, are a definitive cap on one of the most productive and astounding periods in any popular artist’s creative history, a story so familiar it’s become an archetype and myth. While the recordings sound pristine as might be hoped, give or take occasional distortion, the accompanying packaging is left a bit wanting. The long liner note essay by longtime Dylan scholar Clinton Heylin is excellent, but the mere quantity of music seems to demand even more material than the set provides, or even just more caring annotation of what is included, like the dates of film stills or even the names of the concerts’ venues. (Heylin’s own recent book Judas! From Forest Hills to the Free Trade Hall is an excellent start.)The box set offers dramatic resolution, too. During the tour's penultimate gig, at London’s Royal Albert Hall (disc 29), Dylan’s syllable-crunching shout-singing bounces gracefully off the Group’s elastic crunch, a performance every bit as transcendent as Manchester. But on the last night (disc 31), Dylan finally snaps, and after the electric set-opening “Tell Me, Momma,” offers a completely earnest and logical explanation for the music. “I like all my old songs, it's just that things change all the time, everybody knows that,” he says in part. It’s so earnest, in fact, that he finds himself speaking words that one would rarely associate with the future Nobel laureate. “The music is… the music is… I would never venture to say what it is,” Dylan trails off, perhaps even shocking himself in his attempted candor. But on this final night of the tour, mostly, Dylan finally sounds too far gone, his voice weak. He and the Group seem to fray in places, and in doing so reveal the other 21 performances for the high-wire achievements they were and are. “You can take it or leave it, it’s up to you,” Dylan says, and the choice still exists, the answer out there blowin’ somewhere.Two decades on, Ricardo Villalobos is well into the “Friends & Family” phase of his career: The Chilean-German electronic musician often goes for remixes or collaborations—with the likes of synthesist Max Loderbauer, for example, or guitarist Oren Ambarchi—over solo productions. This two-track EP, for Santiago’s Drumma Records, sees Villalobos team with fellow Chilean artist Umho as Ricmho. Like many of Villalobos’ scattered collaborations, you can be forgiven for not recognizing this particular partner in crime: Umho has a scant two releases to his name (which are themselves collaborations) despite a long-running and healthy DJ career.Melo de Melo feels more substantial, owing to its nearly 30-minute runtime. Uhmo and Villalobos have frequently shared the DJ booth over the years, and the EP is billed as a celebration of their shared love for Latin American music. While Umho’s limited production record makes it difficult to suss out who contributed what, the EP is full of the quick, pitched percussion that dots typical Villalobos tracks. Squint and you can hear a conga, or a timbale, or a maraca, all deployed with a busyness foreign to stodgier, upbeat/downbeat dance patterns. Still, Melo de Melo scans as Latin American in pretty much the same manner all Villalobos productions do.The A-side, “Por Suerte,” features a resonant ping played with considerable vigor and debatable purpose. It sticks out in a thicket of percussion that, for much of the track, masks a warm, evolving ambient melody. That melody breaks through in the track’s final minute as the pops and clicks fade, churning slowly and sounding considerably more reflective and calm than your average Villalobos work. The EP’s title track (credited only to Villalobos) begins more conventionally, with a steady kick and a sparring match between a conga and a snare. Halfway through, Villalobos introduces a long, evolving sample that sounds like a string quartet being kneaded into itself. By the end of the track, it’s a roughly diced, digitally charred wreck.It’s a beautiful sequence, one that underlines how Villalobos seems increasingly interested in welding avant-garde composition and dance music. (See also: last year’s Vilod collaboration with Loderbauer, in which the duo wrung minimal jazz out of their synthesizers.) Villalobos remains commendably weird in almost every way, even if, as a project, Ricmho seems only half-formed. Ultimately, that’s why Melo de Melo underwhelms, however slightly: Villalobos has been churning out jammy, crumbling tracks like this for most of a decade at this point, and these are hardly the jammiest, or the most crumbly.No subliminal messaging for Peder Mannerfelt: on Equality Now, he wears his politics on his record sleeve. Hailing from Stockholm, Mannerfelt is a skillful engineer and a tireless collaborator. As well as his solo production work, he performs as one half of analog synth duo Roll the Dice, has produced records for Blonde Redhead and Glasser under the name the Subliminal Kid, and played an integral role in Karin Dreijer Andersson’s Fever Ray. He shares a few common interests with Andersson—emancipatory politics, exotic rhythms, and Brothers Grimm dress-up. Playing live, he wears a waist-length wig that obscures his face, making him look like a sort of techno Rapunzel.The Equality Now EP marks Mannerfelt’s first output on Numbers, the Glasgow dance imprint that discovered Rustie and SOPHIE, among others. Its three tracks explore three quite different directions, while holding to a few base tenets: clever ideas, executed simply, with a minimum of gloss or clutter. The title track is crisp, propulsive techno produced with such economy that you probably couldn’t excise a single aspect without the whole thing disintegrating. Arid drums lock into a manic bounce, synth lines bend and flex into strange timbres and two synthetic voices—one male, one female—intone the world “equality”, mostly in unison, sometimes a tantalizing half-beat out of of step. Its repetition recalls a chant or a march: grassroots activism tailored for the dancefloor.While at first glance Equality Now’s productions can appear fairly simplistic, they often conceal ingenious elements. “Breaking Patterns,” the EP’s second track, is a borderline-crude acid number that contains rhythmic echoes of Mannerfelt’s 2015 LP The Swedish Congo Record—a sonic “research project” which attempted to fastidiously recreate 1930s field recordings of tribal music in the Belgian Congo using modern tools. Taut hand drums pound ceaselessly, as synthesizers spit out electronic zaps and distressed strings crawl mournfully across the frame. But most of the action happens on a microscopic level: beats form themselves into unusual polyrhythms that morph and reshape, while small twists of FX or a shifting mix suddenly jolt the track onto a new footing.Equality Now bows out with “Rules, Ropes & Strings,” an ambient piece that pares back the beats and ushers in slow tidal washes of shimmering texture. It’s a strangely sedate end for a record that is elsewhere out to enthuse or provoke. Hardly unusual for a figure as mercurial as Mannerfelt, though. This is music guided by impulse, not premeditation; music in which an idea is good, right up until the moment that it’s spent.Some time this March, a SWAT team descended on a home in a wooded, well-to-do North Carolina suburb. According to the producer Elite, helicopters vultured overhead as armed officers broke down the front door and raided the house, presumably acting on a tip from a neighbor who believed the occupants were manufacturing or selling drugs. There was no one home; masked and bulletproof-vested men kept pouring inside. Instead of a grow-op, officers found a basement littered with recording equipment, the bones of a creative hideout that had filled the community with little more than some errant blunt smoke.The house was J. Cole’s. It wasn’t the native North Carolinian’s only property holding: he’d previously purchased his childhood home, at 2014 Forest Hills Drive in Fayetteville, with plans to turn it into a rent-free safe haven for single mothers. On his last solo effort—which was named after the Fayetteville house—he rapped about his adolescent fantasies of white picket fences surrounded by trees, by quiet. The SWAT experience, recounted on “Neighbors,” the best song from Cole’s fourth album, 4 Your Eyez Only, is a grim perversion of those dreams, and it anchors a record that wrestles with the fragility of life and the importance of family ties.For long stretches, Eyez is a rumination on death. Cole frequently invokes other points of view, including that of his late friend James McMillan, Jr., who was killed at 22. The album is peppered with references to his murder, and a testimony from a young girl in Fayetteville, which appears at two points on “Ville Mentality,” echoes the reality faced by McMillan’s own daughter. Cole is himself a new father (“She’s Mine, Pt. 2” is about his wife and newborn child), and the title track, which closes the album with a missive for those young girls, is anchored by his personal anxieties, making for some of Cole’s most affecting writing to date.He also comes to life on “Immortal,” which sounds as if someone played Cole an unheard 2Pac song from the Makaveli sessions and then dared him to recreate it from memory. The song’s narrator feeds baggies through a burglar bar, watches Bic lighters wave under spoons, wakes up early to hit the Bowflex. It’s details like that last one that set “Immortal” apart from so much of Cole’s early work: you can see the speaker bathed in the artificial light of 3 a.m. infomercials, figuring he needs to put some weight on. He equivocates—“crime pays like a part-time job” is the sort of evocative, economical phrase that has eluded Cole so often in the past. And when he rattles off rhetorical questions (“Have you ever seen a nigga that was Black on the moon?/Have you ever seen your brother go to prison as you cry?/Have you ever seen a motherfucking ribbon in the sky?”) he’s working in a long tradition of rappers and writers knocking a grave present against against its opposite. To that end, at the song’s most defiant moment, Cole nods to his real life: “If they want a nigga, they gon’ have to send a SWAT team.”At its lowest points, 4 Your Eyez Only rehashes Cole’s worst tendencies. “No Role Modelz,” a breakout hit from 2014 Forest Hills Drive, tried to cast crass, regressive ideas about women as a moral struggle; “Deja Vu” is its mopey inverse, where Cole shouts over the music in a club to ask “Who in their right mind letting you out the house alone?/Tell me, is your house a home?” The song also lapses into some of the album’s laziest writing, like “On a scale from 1 to 10, that girl’s a hundred.” It’s like “Marvin’s Room” for guys who brought their high school letter jackets to college. (It’s worth noting that while “Deja Vu” and Bryson Tiller’s massive “Exchange” share a sample and, at points, have similar drum programming, producer Vinylz claims that he and Boi-1da produced “Deja Vu” before its beat was stolen and repurposed for the Tiller version.)Speaking of production, that’s the one area where Eyez falls far behind Forest Hills Drive. After “Deja Vu,” the album slips into a three-song lull of pale, ornate music—unfortunate because the songs grapple with the early death of parents, Cole’s love for his wife, and McMillan’s death, respectively. “Ville Mentality” in particular plays like an interlude, and it might in fact be better served with just its hook and the aforementioned words from a young woman. Eyez sorely misses the type of serrated edge given to Forest Hills Drive by tracks like “03’ Adolescence,” “G.O.M.D.,” or “Fire Squad.” For this record, Cole leans more heavily on his singing voice than ever before—a welcome change at points, but it pushes the middle section of Eyez onto the sleepier side of the ledger.Aside from the moments when he taps into something greater (“Immortal,” “Neighbors,” “4 Your Eyez Only”), Cole’s most marked improvement comes by sanding down the more grating parts of his style. There is less moralistic grandstanding, and no lines about bodily functions or leftover Italian food. In their place are references to airbrushed RIP shirts and private prison shareholders. That said, a dutiful focus on the album’s central storyline means there aren’t big swings or long tangents in any direction, and aside from that trio of great tracks, Cole seldom sounds like he’s leaving it all out on the field.But Eyez often feels like a natural extension from the more overtly political tone of Cole’s public comments since his trip to Ferguson in August of 2014. This isn’t a protest record in the acute sense, but it’s unavoidably the product of the types of oppression that beckon SWAT teams into suburban homes on nothing but hearsay. In that vein, the most quietly radical decision Cole makes here is following “Neighbors” with a song called “Foldin’ Clothes,” where he and his wife shirk the outside world for Netflix and almond milk. That domestic stillness—stillness that might be interrupted at any moment by helicopters or an evening news report—is fragile, and that fragility is its own devastating statement. “Today’s underground may be the answer to tomorrow’s leisure,” intones an earnest British newscaster, narrating film of London’s U.F.O. Club circa January 1967 while its house band, Pink Floyd, jams amid the flashing lights. And darned if he wasn’t right: the black-and-white segment is now found on the massive new $550, 11-CD/9-DVD/8 Blu-Ray box set, Pink Floyd: The Early Years, 1965–1972. With over 27 hours of material, the package overflows with replica 45 rpm singles, gig flyers, posters, tickets, sheet music, and more, and the ark-like box should provide serious leisure-time satisfaction for both longtime Floyd freaks and aspiring heads alike.The Early Years tells the remarkable story of Pink Floyd’s career up through the moment they became part of yesterday’s underground and today’s mainstream, stopping just before the writing and recording of 1973’s Dark Side of the Moon. Charting the band’s progression from the wig-flipping baroque psychedelia of Syd Barrett’s songwriting through their wooliest jams and into the new space beyond, The Early Years doesn’t follow a straight path. It shows an astonishing capacity to turn corners and evolve, a long arc that might give hope to every band jamming away in its practice space in search of a voice.Beginning as a blues combo with the perfectly British drug-punning name the Tea Set (“tea” being slang for weed, maaaan), the band rechristened themselves as the Pink Floyd Sound by the time of the 1965 demo sessions that open the box’s first disc. Though not particularly competent or interesting R&B players, as demonstrated by their cover of Slim Harpo’s “I’m a King Bee” just as much as an untitled 1968 “Blues Jam” on a later disc, it’s fascinating to hear Barrett’s already distinctly bent rhythm guitar as filtered through the Bo Diddley beat of “Double O Bo.” Unheard before being released in 2015 as a double 7" for Record Store Day, the 1965 sessions also highlight the first fruits of Barrett’s songwriting, the playfulness of “Butterfly” displaying the stylist and singer he already was. “Along with Anthony Newley, he was the first guy I’d heard to sing pop or rock with a British accent,” David Bowie would say of Barrett, a madcap permission-granter for a new generation of British musicians less beholden to imitating their American heroes.Leaving the band in a haze of mental health issues in early 1968, Barrett’s legend would loom over the quartet for years. On the set’s volume from that year, titled Germin/Ation, Floyd’s earliest songwriting without their former leader sounds like a drab imitation, with keyboardist Rick Wright’s “It Would Be So Nice” anticipating the B-list ’60s twee-pop parodied by Spinal Tap on “Cups and Cakes.” Instead, Floyd would start to find themselves in the deep space of their early jam centerpiece, “Interstellar Overdrive,” the nearly 10-minute freak-out that closed their 1967 debut and whose descending chromatic riff dropped them into the beyond. With seven versions on the set, including a devastatingly weird DVD/Blu Ray-only 1969 take of the later slower arrangement featuring Frank Zappa on guitar, the song would provide the first portal for the band’s furthest explorations. (One of the set’s few big bummers is that it doesn’t offer audio-only downloads of the live performances featured on the visual discs.)For fans of Floyd’s experimental tendencies, The Early Years offers enormous fun, beginning with a never-bootlegged soundtrack session. Recorded by the Barrett-era lineup in October 1967 to accompany an abstract film by John Latham, the nine takes are all light show swirl, star-splatter guitar, and primitively convincing free drumming by Nick Mason. And though, later on, Barrett replacement David Gilmour would rightly become known as a guitar hero, his playing throughout The Early Years is judicious when it comes to solos. Wailing some tasty space-blues on “Careful With That Axe, Eugene” during a jam-heavy August 1969 set from Amsterdam and a blistering “Atom Heart Mother” from Montreux ’70, Gilmour just as often fits into the band’s tapestry of gentle cymbal taps and moody keyboard filigrees.Where their American countercultural cousins in the Grateful Dead found mind-manifesting wonder in their musical interpretation of cosmic space, the Floyd more often channeled the cold vacuum and existential tedium, perhaps a reflection of the post-psychedelic fate of Barrett. “Moonhead,” their soundtrack to the Moon landing performed live on BBC TV and captured on Bonus Continu/Ation, is a deliberate controlled float, more proto-symphonic than hippie jam. It’s this questioning sadness that the band starts to tap into during their 1969 sessions, the first mournful strains that would find their fullest expression on Dark Side of the Moon. The watershed event comes when Waters’ “Cymbaline” and “Green is the Colour” and Gilmour’s “The Narrow Way” all first turn up on the box, part of a May 1969 BBC recording for John Peel; it’s one of seven sessions for the DJ, all classic bootlegs in their own right.In slightly different and renamed form, all three songs play a part in one of the box’s most enticing if imperfect pieces: a complete live recording of The Journey and The Man, the band’s first attempt at conceptual suites of music, performed as two halves of a show on several occasions in 1969. Though fans have attempted to reconstruct the performances as though it were a lost album, the actual product includes reworked existing pieces, going back as far as “Pow. R Toc H.,” from their 1967 debut, The Piper at the Gates of Dawn, here becoming “The Pink Jungle.” Performed with onstage happenings and fourth-wall-breaking intrusions, the music is a fascinating forerunner to Floyd’s more successful theatrics. With sci-fi noir atmospherics (“The Labyrinths of Auximines”), live musique concrète featuring band-members sawing through wood (“Work”), overblown drum solos in disguise (“Doing It”), as well as genetic connections to the Anglophonic fun of the Syd era (Waters’ “Afternoon,” collected as “Biding My Time” on 1971’s Relics), the two suites are first drafts. That the band scrapped them and moved along to the next ambitious projects in the queue is yet another testament to their developing editing skills.As career periods go, the seven years of Pink Floyd’s Early Years don’t exactly match other intense eras of classic rock creativity, like Bob Dylan from 1961 to 1968 or the Beatles from 1962 to 1969. But this set illustrates something about both Pink Floyd’s own path and the rewards of resilience. While remembered for their outsized onstage gestures like inflatable pigs and the disassembly of a giant wall, the real revelation of The Early Years is to hear exactly how slowly and modestly Pink Floyd came into themselves; despite the scale of their ambition, the box feels less a blueprint than a scale model. While Barrett’s contributions remain singular, the development of the band over these years wasn’t so much genius than inspired workmanship, not all of it successful. David Gilmour’s “Fat Old Sun,” appearing first on a July 1970 Peel session, is less compelling in its 15-minute jammed-out incarnation the following year. “Embryo,” though, develops from a three-minute post-Barrett psych-folk bauble on a 1968 BBC session to a fully realized 10-minute prog arrangement by 1971, the band’s restlessness apparent and worthwhile.There’s plenty to gnaw on, from Barrett’s whimsy to the formless countercultural yearning of the middle years to the emergence of Waters and Gilmour as songwriters to the brilliant suite-making of 1971’s “Echoes.” While the band would shatter amid acrimonious lawsuits a decade after this set’s conclusion, the music is the sound of musicians working in concert towards an unseen and unknown goal. In the modern age of oversized vault-clearing and copyright-protecting box sets, there is something resoundingly human about The Early Years, which only makes the achievements more extraordinary. Concluding with a new mix of 1972’s Obscured by Clouds (excluding bonus material), one can hear all the pieces of their more iconic future albums clicking into place and the sound of space closing around them into something more fixed. But that’s the topic of another box set.The stakes were high for Harley Edward Streten. In 2012, the Sydney, Australia-based producer, who records as Flume, released his self-titled album as EDM was reaching peak cultural saturation. Flume’s beat-oriented sound—experimental enough for comparisons to LA’s Brainfeeder scene, pop enough to best One Direction in the charts—was so quick to catch fire that even Streten seemed shocked by his ascendency. “There was a lot of hype,” he told Complex recently. “It exploded in Australia first and then the rest of the world was coming on board and it was quite a process.” This was only one year after his first live show, and Flume—then 21—had a legitimate hit album and the attention of music’s biggest names. Over the next 36 months he would remix Lorde, Disclosure, Sam Smith, and Arcade Fire. So, when it came time for to drop Skin, the burden was heavy to prove he was more than just the flavor of the moment. “I struggled with the pressure of having the successful record after the first record,” he said. “Second album syndrome. I’m living proof; it’s very real.” Streten’s way of dealing with astronomical expectations, as it turned out, were equally large ambitions: if Flume was a beat maker flirting with pop, Skin was a pop record with an experimental sense of rhythm. The sixteen-track album was stacked with legacy giants and alt-pop darlings, among them: Beck, Raekwon, Vince Staples, Little Dragon, AlunaGeorge, MNDR, and Vic Mensa. Some songs, like “Tiny Cities,” were successes. (Beck recast as a future-pop Beach Boy was an unexpected win.) More often, however, the features roster seemed a cagey distraction to Flume’s more left-field impulses. Skin Companion 1, is billed as the first EP, presumably in a series, that will feature music recorded from the same sessions that produced Skin. But while that album emerged from a sous-vide of industry hype, its companion isn’t nearly as overdone. Of the EP’s four tracks, only one, “Trust,” features a guest vocalist—the Preatures’ Isabella Manfredi—and she’s here because she makes sense for the song, not to generate buzz. (The Preatures, like Flume, are New South Wales natives.) The result is a glitchy and glossy R&B-inflected tune, somewhere between CHVRCHES and Natasha Kmeto, with all the punch of Skin standout single, “Never Be Like You.”The remainder of the album features more airy successes, similar to the shorter cuts on Skin. “V” rattles and clatters for under three minutes, blending organic percussion, disembodied vocals, and elastic synths; the sound is surreal and meditative, like playing pick-up-sticks in a zen garden might be. The EP’s most straightforward track, “Heater,” is restrained compared to the Glastonbury-ready productions on Skin. It could work as a festival experience—there’s a mellow mid-section drop—but the compressed synths invite enthusiastic head nods, not dancing. The EP closes with “Quirk.” Etherial and unstructured, a soulful vocal sample drifts atop percussion that never quite reaches Arca-levels of avant-garde. Flume's album art, which looks like weaponized, net-art ikebana, does an accurate job of capturing a sound that is as biological as it is mechanical.Had something like Skin Companion 1 came out before the release of Flume’s sophomore effort, fans would probably be questioning Streten’s muscle: these are subtle productions, more Gold Panda than SBTRKT. But now that we’ve seen Flume’s version of laser-focused hit making, it’s nice to him in a painterly, if insubstantial mode. After holding his breath for four years, it was time for Flume to exhale. While Turkey boasted its own heady rock scene during the late 1960s, the Anatolian Invasion didn’t make much of a dent in the West. Were it not for the tireless digging and reissues from imprints like Andy Votel’s Finders Keepers, Pharaway Sounds, and Sublime Frequencies, we still might know little about Turkish rock. Sure, the searing strings of Erkin Koray, Muhlis Akarsu, and the like may have appealed to Woodstock-era rock fans, but the thundering drums underpinning them led to a Turkish revival of sorts decades later, with everyone from the Gaslamp Killer and the Weeknd to Timbaland sampling Turkish music.But back home, a military coup in 1980 led to Turkey’s rock scene being repressed to the point of near-extinction. It’s only recently that it’s begun emanating beyond the borders, though with President Erdoğan’s new crackdowns on dissent, one fears it might be a short-lived renaissance. Ever since her 2014 debut, vocalist Gaye Su Akyol has emerged at the fore this revitalized music scene, alongside acts like Ayyuka and Büyük Ev Ablukada. The music is unmistakably Turkish in its heritage—the modes and scales to the guitars mimic the baglama and ud—but there are rock influences as well, from Nevermind and Nick Cave to “White Rabbit.” This confluence of East and West makes Hologram Ĭmparatorluğu an intriguing listen even to those who don’t speak Turkish.A dizzying updraft of buzzing strings immediately makes “Hologram” soar. But while the music alludes to transcendence and the song, on the surface, is about love, it’s also about seeing through such an illusion (fitting for a group whose live shows often feature Akyol and band in masks and an album title that translates as “Hologram Empire”). “Thought I had a new world found/I was fooled,” Akyol sings, but listen closer and Akyol’s august voice also hints at capture and escape, which feels both surreal and real at once: “I am being seized/Two baby finches, let’s escape there/To Pluto.”Akyol’s father is famous Turkish painter Muzaffer Akyol, and in his vivid, dreamlike canvases, there’s an antecedent for his daughter’s language. On the simmering, bandoneon-laced “Anlasana Sana Aşiğim,” Akyol’s lyrics on love are by-turns strange and tactile: “I’ve become a butterfly/Come and find me/Black holes are everywhere/Confessions all clandestine.” The Bad Seeds influence comes through on the noir-ish throb and reverb guitar riffs of “Dünya kaleska,” and Akyol’s lyrics convey bleakness worthy of Cave.Snaking hand percussion and rattles gives “Eski tüfek” a driving pulse, matched by the surf guitars of her backing band, Bubituzak. Their guitars are as comfortable evoking the likes of Erkin Koray as they are Dick Dale and Ennio Morricone’s spaghetti western themes, heightening the drama of Akyol’s songs. Closer “Berdus” rides a lashing guitar riff and percolating bassline that gives the song a steady building rhythm, as Akyol imagines herself lost in the woods like Little Red Riding Hood and conjures wolves and bears alike. Just don’t mistake it for a fairytale ending. For as the music fades away, Akyol’s last line leaves a pejorative image for her fellow countrymen, and, well, everyone: “Yesterday’s piece of shit has become king over our head.”Jeff Buckley would be 50 years old this year, and it’s hard not to think about what he’d be up to right now. As an adopted son of New York City’s downtown art scene in the 1990s, he could be wailing truth to power, like Patti Smith. As someone who hated how the early internet infringed on his privacy, he could have turned into an elusive icon, like Fiona Apple. A virtuoso guitarist with perfect pitch and a keen ear for improvisation, he may have leaned into Los Angeles’ embrace of modern jazz, jamming with Thundercat and Kamasi Washington. As a punk purist who was drawn to severe sounds and radical ideas toward the end of his life, maybe he would have turned into an anti-establishment musical figurehead, like Steve Albini. He could have coupled electronics with progressive politics and the voice of a fallen angel, like ANOHNI. Or, as an acolyte of George Carlin and David Letterman who was known for his outlandishly comical stage banter, maybe he would have given up music altogether and tried his luck at biting comedy. Would he have been excited by the way his version of “Hallelujah” became such a ubiquitous hymn, or repulsed by its overuse? Then again, without his tragic story as ballast, would “Hallelujah” have ever seen a resurgence at all?Such what-ifs are inevitable when an artist dies too soon, but fruitless daydreaming is especially tantalizing when it comes to Buckley. His talents were so limitless, his range so vast, and his explorations of them so inchoate. In his 30 years, he lived a head-spinning number of musical lives, as chronicled in David Browne’s essential biography, Dream Brother. Growing up in Orange County in the ’70s, Buckley was obsessed with the prog theatrics of Styx, Yes, and Genesis. In his early days as a professional musician, he played with reggae and hair metal bands. During that time, he paid the bills as a guitarist and songwriter for hire, creating hacky tracks for a variety of L.A. up-and-comers, from R&B crooners to precious singer-songwriters. He made a proper name for himself in tiny Manhattan clubs through ecstatic solo covers of everyone from Nina Simone to Van Morrison to Pakistani qawwali singer Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan. Such fluidity would be unique in any era, but especially in the early ’90s, when the internet had yet to fully flatten barriers between styles, Buckley’s musical interests were freakishly broad. At a 1993 show, he mimicked Khan’s chanting vocals over the “Smells Like Teen Spirit” riff as a delightfully bemused audience tried to take it all in. Following the impromptu mashup, he quipped: “I’m a ridiculous person.”This ridiculousness miraculously came together on 1994’s Grace, an album that combined psychedelia, Led Zeppelin-style hard rock, shimmering pop, torch balladry, and a hymn originally written in the 16th century. Released in the middle of grunge mania, it was an ethereal tonic. Grace was not an instant hit by any means—the record sold 2,000 copies in its opening week and only went platinum at the beginning of this year. But Buckley’s label, the Sony-owned Columbia, home to legends like Dylan and Springsteen, put a ton of money into the project nonetheless, sending the singer around the globe with his band on tour to help kick off what they hoped to be a decades-long career. Though he was signed to a major label, Buckley was forever mindful of upholding the sacredness of his music and avoiding the evils of commercialism—necessary objectives at a time when alternative culture was being streamlined by corporations at a breakneck pace. His artsier tendencies sometimes clashed with Columbia’s bottom line, but in general he was given the room—and cash—to make his own choices, with the label figuring they’d eventually recoup on their investment later on. Buckley was in a privileged position, and he undoubtedly enjoyed the runway he was being offered, but being associated with a global conglomerate weighed on him. He was a punk at heart, after all. He admired the way Kurt Cobain was able to navigate the industry before he killed himself, and hung a photo of the Nirvana frontman in his bus while touring behind Grace. And there was another artist whose battles with commerce were always in the back of Buckley’s mind: his father Tim. Buckley barely knew his dad, but he was well aware of Tim’s legacy as a risk-taking singer-songwriter in the ’60s and ’70s who was chewed up by the business before he died of a heroin overdose in 1975 at age 28. The son was adamant not to follow his father’s path, going so far as to poke fun at such tragic rock‘n’roll mythologies onstage. In this way, Buckley wanted his art to capture all the romantic wonders of ’60s pop while maintaining the knowing cynicism of his own era—a tough balance even without a genealogy filled with alcoholism, mental instability, and dire misfortune.So under increased pressure from his label, Buckley began nursing a contrarian streak and attempted to trade in Grace’s gorgeous softness for something spikier and confrontational with his second album. There were troubles from the start. The initial rehearsal sessions with his band at the end of 1995 didn’t go anywhere. Soon after, his drummer quit. Columbia started throwing around potential producers to try to get the album on track, radio-friendly names like Butch Vig, Brendan O’Brien, Steve Lillywhite, or even Brian Eno. Buckley had a different idea: erstwhile Television frontman Tom Verlaine. This was years before the Strokes would put Verlaine’s band—and its scuzzy postpunk lineage—back in the spotlight, and the producer was about as far as you could get from a typical hitmaker. Which is exactly what Buckley wanted. In the summer of 1996, Buckley and his band—including an inexperienced new drummer—recorded their first session with Verlaine in New York. Nobody was happy with the results and, that October, Buckley wrote in his journal: “I’m going to lay off the band.” Instead, he replaced one new drummer with another and continued to work on his in-progress songs, trying to nail down the more lo-fi sound in his head, something like the blunt force of contemporary underground acts such as the Grifters, Polvo, and the Jesus Lizard. He was over the pristine untouchability of “Hallelujah.” Feeling boxed in by Manhattan, Buckley decided to follow his friends in the Grifters to Memphis, where he regrouped with his band and Verlaine for another recording session in February 1997. Once again, the experience didn’t live up to Buckley’s high standards, as he was constantly rearranging songs and tweaking lyrics in search of the right sound and feel. He was a perfectionist with an encyclopedic knowledge of rock history and a masterful musical talent; he had so many choices, and whereas that dexterity once served as a stunning resume, it was now stymying him.After the February session, Buckley realized Verlaine was not the man to bring his album to fruition, and it was decided that Grace producer Andy Wallace would sit in the control booth when the time was right. The band went back to New York, and Buckley stayed in Memphis, in an empty shotgun shack on a nondescript block with only the house’s jumping fleas to keep him company. He continued writing, taping ideas onto his four-track recorder. Away from the stress of New York, he loosened up, playing weekly gigs at a dive bar to small crowds. His musical brain started to flow and, by the spring, he felt like he had finally figured out what his album should be. He sent demo tapes to each of the three members of his band, summoning them down to Memphis once again on May 29, 1997. But around the same time they were touching down at the airport, Buckley decided to take a spontaneous dip into the nearby Wolf River in black boots and an “Altamont” T-shirt, singing Zeppelin’s “Whole Lotta Love” while doing the backstroke. Then a barge glided by. Its current tugged Buckley underneath the water. He was gone. Following his death, Columbia intended to cull a 10-track album from the two Verlaine sessions and release it under Buckley’s working title, My Sweetheart the Drunk, in late 1997. His mother, who took charge of her son’s estate, nixed that plan, and instead compiled a two-disc set featuring tracks from the Verlaine sessions as well as some of the four-track experiments Buckley was compiling in his small house. Either way, there’s no getting around the fact that Buckley did not want any of the recordings on Sketches for My Sweetheart the Drunk to be heard. Even so, it’s a fascinating document, one that lifts the lid on a prodigy’s creative process and lets us peer into an erratic mind that could be too mercurial for its own good.From the first few seconds, it’s clear that this is not Grace 2. Opener “Sky Is a Landfill” is the closest Buckley ever came to agitprop, a denunciation of capitalist and media systems that now reads prophetic, if a bit overwritten. “Turn your head away from the screen, oh people,” he sings, “it will tell you nothing more.” Considering the proliferation of smartphones in the last 20 years—and the untruths and addictions that have come with them—it’s easy to see the warning as wisdom. Meanwhile, the music is stark and fuzzed out, like a post-hardcore version of the Smashing Pumpkins. Its angst has not aged terribly well, though, as with everything on this document, it definitely allows for future greatness—what if he changed that one wordy line, or smoothed out that other transition? Listening to an incomplete work like Sketches, it’s natural for anyone to turn into a music critic, picking at things that could be improved. And it’s reasonable to think Buckley was doing the same exact thing in Memphis. Though he was aiming for something gritty with the new music, the general rule with Sketches goes: The less distorted the song, the better it holds up. Buckley’s voice, which could go from divinely supple to shockingly overwrought, just sounds better when it’s not trying to blow the room out. Just because he could sing anything doesn’t mean he should sing anything. “Yard of Blonde Girls,” written by a few of Buckley’s friends, is a grungy trifle that has him trying out his best Alice in Chains impression. The singer originally hid the song from Columbia thinking they might glom onto it as a single, and his reservations are founded; unlike Buckley’s best, “Yard of Blonde Girls” sounds carbon-dated to the mid-’90s. “Nightmares by the Sea” fares better, its foreboding atmosphere and quicksilver arrangement finding a midpoint between Grace’s flowering darkness and something more sinister—twist your ear just right and you can almost hear St. Vincent coming up with something similar now. And like many tracks on Sketches, “Nightmares” can be hard to hear, filled with eerie lines like, “I’ve loved so many times and I’ve drowned them all.” But then, Buckley always used water imagery in his songs. It was an elemental fear for him, something he could not wrap his hands around. So instead of enacting some sort of death wish by wading into the Wolf River—as some have suggested—he could have been finally overcoming a phobia. As for these songs’ scenes of death, that was typical for Buckley as well. As in any important drama, the stakes were always high in Jeff Buckley songs—he fashioned himself a poet, a seer, a gothic diva. Music was his life, so echoes of death were inevitable. He was always running away from them. “My opinion was that the guy was much better without the band,” Verlaine has said of Buckley, and Sketches bears this theory out. The most beautiful moments occur when Buckley lets himself be beautiful, something he was loathe to do after his high cheekbones, intense stare, and luscious vocals turned him into alt idol following the release of Grace. But these songs aren’t mere retreads—they’re more creepy than consoling. “Morning Theft,” “Opened Once,” and “Jewel Box” are all love songs, but they flutter, never quite landing on a resolution. They are lyrically surreal, dancing around a romantic elusiveness that fuels so much great songwriting. “New Year’s Prayer” is similarly low-key, a mantra between light and dark inspired by Buckley’s infatuation with Sufi devotional music, while “You and I” comes off like an unsettling plea from a damp forest in the middle of the night. The song hints at yet another future for Buckley: as a Scott Walker-type ghostly menace throwing shadows around his unearthly voice forevermore. Perhaps the most surprising song on the album is “Everybody Here Wants You,” a straight-up R&B number that could sit comfortably aside hits by the era’s neo-soul stars like Maxwell and Erykah Badu. Buckley wasn’t happy with the song, thinking it was too much of a pastiche. He’s probably right, but it’s wild to think that he could toss off such genre-tourist brilliance at will. The four-track demos, by nature, are frustratingly unfinished, and they require a special sort of imaginative listening to hear what could have been. With its bittersweet resignation and one of the better hooks Buckley ever put to tape, “I Know We Could Be So Happy Baby (If We Wanted to Be)” has traces of a rock radio hit; “Murder Suicide Meteor Slave,” with its careening structure, ugly discordance, and self-lacerating lyrics, barely has traces of a song. One of the most intriguing demos, “Gunshot Glitter,” was wrongly turned into a bonus cut but is worth seeking out—riding a steady DIY bass thump, it hints at flamboyant dance rock decadence, as Buckley playfully deems himself a “paranoia politician diva.” The song had the potential to encapsulate all sides of Buckley’s persona—the weirdo, the hopeless lover, the charming clown—into something that could pump both hearts and bodies. It hurts to know we’ll never hear it as it was supposed to be heard.Even if all had gone according to plan, and the finished My Sweetheart the Drunk was released at the end of 1997, it would have entered a shifting pop landscape. By then, the aggressive male wing of guitar rock was migrating from grunge to nu metal. Teen pop was on the rise, with Backstreet Boys and Spice Girls CDs flying out of chain stores while *NSYNC and Britney were still on the horizon. Hip-hop and electronic were ascendant as well, making the idea of a band of white guys with guitars seem increasingly quaint. There was an exception: Radiohead, whose frontman Thom Yorke counted Buckley as a major inspiration on his vocal style, released OK Computer the week before the singer’s death. That album pinpointed a lot of the anxiety and doom that Buckley was trying to put forward with his own music, but in a way that was epic and widescreen instead of insular and austere—it would have provided some tough competition in the howling-falsetto sweepstakes. Coldplay, perhaps Buckley’s most successful progeny, didn’t arrive until a few years later, essentially unspooling the singer’s complications for mass consumption. But, given his wariness of the mainstream and his quest to subvert expectation at every turn, it seems safe to say that Jeff would’ve hated Coldplay.Sketches ends with a solo performance of the standard “Satisfied Mind” that Buckley sang on the radio in 1992. It’s a song about maintaining a richness of spirit that everyone from Ella Fitzgerald to Bob Dylan to Mahalia Jackson has sung over the years, and he does it justice. “When it comes my time,” he sings, “I’ll leave this old world with a satisfied mind.” But in the context of this release—and the tragedy intertwined with it—the conclusion is too easy, too pat. By most accounts, Buckley’s mind was anything but satisfied when he passed. In the days before his death, friends say he was acting strangely, talking in code, making random phone calls to people from his past. He was also coming to grips with manic-depressive tendencies. All this doesn’t necessarily mean he wanted to die, but it does seem to indicate he was dealing with some serious issues. The volatile nature of Sketches’ four-track demos bear this out too. Plus, satisfaction was never this artist’s goal. He wanted to disrupt, even if that meant going against his most obvious gifts. Dissatisfaction was something Jeff Buckley had to grapple with for much of his life. It’s where he left us.The Hamilton original cast recording recently passed half-a-billion streams on Spotify.  That’s billion, with a “B”: Try to think of more influential, beloved, and ubiquitous cast recordings in history—you will probably end up counting on two hands, maybe one. The music of Hamilton now sits directly in the center of American pop culture, and it has smuggled rapping—the unadulterated, information-dense kind that you can hear tripping from the tongues of the best MCs—into the ears of Dick Cheney and Mike Pence with it, for God’s sake.So why does Hamilton Mixtape exist? Hamilton doesn’t need any help crossing over, into hip-hop or anywhere else. In its best-case scenario, The Hamilton Mixtape is an afterthought, an asterisk or a curio for Hamilton obsessives. On it, a wide-ranging group of rappers and R&B singers reinterpret, or in many cases simply cover, the tracks from the soundtrack, which has been lightly reworked and retooled by a range of producers, with guidance from Questlove and assistance from J. Period, !llmind, and more. Ja Rule and Ashanti reunite to take on the Eliza Schuyler/Alexander romance tune “Helpless.” Regina Spektor and Ben Folds perform "Dear Theodosia.” Sia is here. Wiz Khalifa is here. Oh, and Jimmy Fallon, too: he performs “You’ll Be Back,” the jaunty break-up song from King George addressed to the unruly colonies. Fallon starts with a painful joke about how he was classically trained, “and by that I mean I was trained by vocal coach Ed Classically.” Then he takes a breath and starts singing. Trust me: You do not want to be in the room where this happens. The guest list throughout is an assortment of marquee names and WTFs. Black Thought sounds tremendous and forceful on the rework of “My Shot,” but he’s followed by a plodding Joell Ortiz and a humorless Busta Rhymes, who stiffens back into barking-youth-basketball-coach mode once away from the relaxing influence of his fellow Native Tongues members. There’s a lot of huffing and puffing, a lot of faux-motivational bluster, not a lot of good writing. Lin-Manuel Miranda, who doesn’t show up on the song, is missed.Miranda does show up on one of the mixtape’s only original songs, called “Wrote My Way Out.” He’s joined by Nas, who sounds disengaged, cartoonish, and distant. Miranda, meanwhile, burns through the song’s tissue-thin noble-struggle atmosphere with a verse hot with details. “I caught my first beating from the other kids when I was caught reading/Oh you think you smart? Start bleeding,” he yelps desperately. Yes, his verse also contains the seven-ton-anvil clang of “My mind is where the wild things are/Maurice Sendak.” But he’s a performer, and his ability to convey rising desperation in verse is maybe his purest and clearest link to hip-hop.The Hamilton Mixtape shares one thing in common with its parent album: It is very, very long. But since it isn’t sequenced as a linear narrative, treating the show like a sort of greatest hits, you lose all sense of the knuckle-whitening tension that propels the original forward. Alicia Keys leeches the marital tenderness out of “That Would Be Enough,” turning an urgent and warm plea from a wife to a husband on a frightening precipice into something for torch-lighting ceremonies, as impersonal and pretty as a hotel lobby chandelier. By the time you get to Chance the Rapper, crooning the show’s devastating “Dear Theodosia (reprise),” you realize that The Hamilton Mixtape has managed to drain away the edge and danger from a Broadway show, a curious inversion and just more proof that you can’t Xerox Miranda’s inimitable work.Many were first introduced to Chicago rapper Saba as another local artist in Chance the Rapper’s orbit: he was a standout voice on Donnie Trumpet & the Social Experiment’s Surf (with an uncredited verse on “SmthnthtIwnt”) and more recently he guested on Coloring Book’s “Angels.” Both songs create a decent-enough sample size to assess what exactly Saba is all about: spirituality. He isn’t just fascinated by religion and its role in black families and communities, he’s fixated on the human spirit and the soul, too—both in the eternal sense and the mortal one. His latest mixtape, Bucket List Project, is about the experiences we long to pack into one lifetime. “They ask me ‘why Bucket List?’’’ he raps on “California.” “You know the bucket list: I finally climbed the rock, made it to the top of the precipice/I came from the pessimism of inner city as it is,” detailing the obstacles he’s hurdled to come within arm’s reach of his dream. To that end, the mixtape encourages listeners and guests to find the spirit necessary to achieve their own goals before they die. Saba has always dealt in a hopeful optimism steeped in pragmatism. Chance’s joy overflows, rooted in an unshakable confidence that no matter what, we gon’ be alright. Saba isn’t always so sure about that, but he wants to believe it. His writing is more analytical, taking stock of everything from the flawed U.S. education system to his own value, grading on a weighted scale. On his breakout project, 2014’s ComfortZone, he recounted the observations he’s accrued living on Chicago’s West Side, revealing uncanny abilities to scrutinize and to self-assess in the process (on “401k” “All my niggas did time and got beat up/But I was never street enough to grow up and be a thug”). Bucket List Project, which shares similar sonic space, picks up where its predecessor left off, telling West Side stories that expose the runoff of American corruption. But with death seemingly lurking around every city corner, it wonders, openly, about impermanence, too.The imagery is overwhelmingly theological on Bucket List—paradise, demons, heaven, prayers, blessings, preachers—usually with intent to make sense of a chaotic natural order. He seeks an ear from anyone listening (human or divine), and solutions from anyone who has them. “Call Obama, Jesus, Yeezus/He can save Chicago from the demons and the deacons,” Saba raps sarcastically on the Noname-assisted “Church/Liquor Store,” a Common-esque hood log that notes the role community institutions play in creating a toxic atmosphere. The lyric pinpoints a very particular, and prevalent, response to social inequity: passing the buck. Saba doesn’t really offer any answers, either, opting instead to witness, but what he does offer are insights.Bucket List Project isn’t as complete a journey as ComfortZone, but for the much of its groovy runtime, it is superbly written and performed. Saba is a crafty storyteller who makes full use of his long memory and slithering wordplay. On the xylophone-laden “Stoney,” a ride in a new car becomes a time machine back to past journeys that helped to inform his present. Some of his lyrics have devastating impact. He can open wounds with one-liners as simply as “How you lonely in a room with God?” or “I wish I didn’t have to be famous to be important,” but he’s just as capable of rattling off a razor-sharp diagnosis like this one from “American Hypnosis,” a reliving of personal traumas: “Had to learn my mama depression wasn’t my own/Had to feel the pressures of the pessimism/Trying to convince me that realism was a better vision.”In Bucket List Project’s margins, Saba has several people, some of them notable Chicagoan musicians, sharing their personal bucket lists. Among them: Chance, Lupe Fiasco, guest Jean Deaux, and local rapper Stunt Taylor. One fan wants to go one-on-one with former Chicago Bulls guard Derrick Rose. Another wants to play soccer on rooftops in Tokyo. Deaux wants to smoke a blunt with Beyoncé and de-gentrify Chicago neighborhoods. It’s a wishing well filled to the brim with unfulfilled dreams, further exploring the underlying thesis that inactivity is, in a way, similar to death. One outro speaks to the core of that message: “Hailin’ from the West Side, nigga tryna make it to the Grammys...at least somewhere. Somewhere more than where a muthafucka been.” Bucket List Project finds Saba going somewhere specific: forward.They may appear to be hardy and resilient, but music cultures are fragile things, threatened by drastic shifts in society and political climates. Tropicalia, for one, lasted less than a year in Brazil due to punitive measures like AI-5 instilled by the junta. Club culture in New York City was starved to near extinction in the 1990s by then-mayor Rudy Giuliani’s reinstatement of a severe and obscure cabaret law. And when a coup brought Thomas Sankara into power in Africa’s Upper Volta in 1983, he changed the country’s name to Burkina Faso and installed drastic changes, including a city curfew and a law preventing musicians from charging money for concerts. Almost overnight, the vibrant music scene in Bobo Dioulasso evaporated.Were it not for the vinyl records pressed (and photographs snapped) during the short-lived existence of post-colonial Upper Volta, there would be almost no trace of the rough-hewed yet honeyed music made by the Voltaic musicians of the 1960s and ’70s. After centuries of colonial, tribal, and political clashes, these decades saw a country only recently freed of French colonial oppression, struggling to find footing with their own slippery national identity (the region is home to over 60 ethnic groups). When Upper Volta achieved full independence by 1960, it marked the beginning of a rather peaceful time in the country, which allowed the cosmopolitan music scene a chance to take root and flourish. While Numero Group has a knack for unearthing micro soul scenes in U.S. cities and weird private press albums from dollar bins, the deluxe audio and visual packaging of Bobo Yéyé: Belle Époque in Upper Volta marks their first foray into the motherland. It also makes for a worthwhile exploration of the landlocked African country, oft-times overshadowed by neighbors like Mali, Ghana, and Niger.The influence of French colonialism is evident from the start. Upper Volta’s earliest orchestras took cues from a band comprised of French colonial businessmen and Western instruments like the guitar, trumpet, and saxophone. American R&B, rhumba from the Congo, and (as the title suggests) the yé-yé of French ’60s pop—the bands of Upper Volta drew on all of it. No doubt, the titan of African pop, Franco Luambo’s O.K. Jazz—from the Republic of the Congo and the biggest African star on the continent—had a considerable influence on one of the earliest and most prolific bands to arise in the new country, Volta Jazz.Founded by bandleader Idrissa Koné, Volta Jazz is one of the savannah’s greatest musical exports, releasing a full-length album and some 20 singles during their lifespan. Their output is collected on the first disc of this set and is boisterous and simmering in equal measure, drawing on their native Bobo heritage and mixing in the many rhythms from outside their borders—most crucially, the Cuban music that found its way into the country on 78s. The upbeat rumba “Air Volta” displays an exuberance that threatens to outstrip the fast pace, the horns and electric guitar racing around the hand percussion breakdown at the center of the song. “Mousso Koroba Tike” displays the stinging guitar tone of late ’50s American R&B transposed to a rollicking African polyrhythmic backdrop. Meanwhile, the gentle ballad “Djougou Toro” shimmers like a desert mirage, with Dieudonné Koudougou’s steel guitar rippling in ever widening circles.As the ’70s wore on, Volta Jazz member-turned-bandleader Tidiani Coulibaly groused that the ensemble had not evolved beyond their supper club tuxedos and repertoire to keep up with the changing times. And so, he broke off and formed his own group with five other Volta Jazz members called L’Authentique Dafra Star de Bobo-Dioulasso, who comprise the second album on this set. Dafra Star was a more nimble ensemble and ranged widely (even touring in Mali and Canada), utilizing the traditional timbres of the ballaphon and mixing it with Cuban tumba drums, the double-picked guitars of Zoumana Diarra and Soma Bakary, and electric organ. The tricky interplay of ballaphon, horns, and percussion on “Dounian” anticipates the kind of post-rock tropes that Tortoise would deploy decades and continents later, while “Si Tu Maime” is a slow-burner of a ballad with dramatic organ accents.Okay, heretofore unknown music—from a country we might not be able to easily pinpoint on a map of Africa—dusted off and compiled for consumption is no novel thing. And as much as I enjoy the groups here, I might sooner reach for sets from Franco, Balla et ses Balladins, Rail Band, Star Band de Dakar, or Golden Afrique for future listening pleasure. But where Bobo Yéyé excels beyond those is in how it widens our gaze, showing us not just the music of Upper Volta, but the people who got gussied up on a Saturday night to sweat and dance to it. In this way, it makes for one of the most personable African reissues of the past decade.Parallel to the establishment of Koné’s Volta Jazz group, his cousin Sory Sanlé got his hands on a camera and set up a makeshift studio, documenting the bands and their fans. Along with the 3xLP/CDs, Numero included an 144-page hardbound book of Sanlé’s black and white portraiture, which makes it an indispensable document. In the introduction, Sanlé writes that the Voltaic used to throw photographs of people away once they had died, thinking they were pointless if the person wasn’t present. But then there was a shift: “People began to understand that by looking at old photos, the person was recreated... without photos, it’s like nothing happened.” Sanlé’s intimate photos show his friends and neighbors as fierce and innocent, defiant and bizarrely posed, cool and ridiculous. They catch his subjects in the act of becoming. The participants of Upper Volta’s music scene dress up as soldiers, as distant cousins of the Jackson 5, as tribespeople, as gangsters and b-boys, as musicians trying on different identities, making their presence known, if only for the blink of a shutter. Were these their actual roles in society? Or were they just trying on costumes for play? In looking upon these stunning photos, it’s more fun to just enjoy the enigma of these individuals.Writing about the Mali photographers Seydou Keïta and Malick Sidibé last year in The New York Times, Teju Cole noted that such African portraits offered “a vivid record of individual people, largely shorn of their names and stories but irrepressibly alive… ripostes to the anthropological images of ‘natives’ made by Europeans in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.” Cole added, “Something changed when Africans began to take photographs of one another.” That statement extends to Sanlé’s own eye, and the Bobo Yéyé collection as a whole. While their country’s golden age lasted less than 20 years, the look, attitude, and sound of the Voltaic remains, even if the culture that originally nurtured it is no longer.For many groups, it can be just as difficult to grow out of a specific time or place as it is to shed the preconceptions attached to one hit track. Simian Mobile Disco, the production duo of James Ford and Jas Shaw, reached crossover success in the mid-’00s, as part of a brief yet strangely prolific microgenre that has been described as everything from “new rave” to the cringeworthy moniker “bloghouse.” Disappearing pretty much as soon as it was conceived, and despite giving birth to some fairly decent music, bloghouse, like so many frivolous electro genres before it, fell almost immediately out of favor with the tastemakers and cool kids who tend to be the arbiters of such things (consider that the Justice remix of Ford and Shaw’s previous band Simian’s most successful song somehow became the title of Zac Efron’s ridiculously uncool DJ drama We Are Your Friends). As a new decade began and EDM started to slowly encroach on mainstream electronic music, other acts that came up at the same time as SMD, like Justice, Kavinsky, Boys Noize, and Digitalism, began to lose their footing, their more pop-influenced aesthetic pushed out by a harsher, sweatier style of techno.The success of SMD lies in their singular approach to this problem. Instead of trying to hold onto the style of their defining debut, Attack Decay Sustain Release, and its relatively vocal-heavy, DJ-friendly string of dancefloor bangers, each of their subsequent releases has showcased a different side of their considerable analogue production talents. Their discography runs the gamut of what techno has to offer: Their sophomore release, Temporary Pleasure, harked back to the radio-friendliness of late-’90s big beat, whereas 2014’s Whorl was entirely recorded at an intimate show in Joshua Tree, CA and reworked as an experimental, improvisational piece. As it turns out, SMD’s initial wave of popularity was more of a happy fluke than a measuring stick for the rest of their career.Welcome to Sideways lies on the clubbier side of SMD’s output, but as more of an instrumental exercise in sustenance and restraint than the needle-drops and fist-pumps that have become synonymous with tech house. The album opens with the simple 4/4 beat of “Happening Distractions,” the building block on which Welcome to Sideways constructs its minimal melodies and heady, spacious sequencing. Good electronic music is almost always a method of addition rather than subtraction, and all of the tracks on the album begin as skeletal imprints of sounds and ideas before they take full form. Other early tracks like “Far Away From a Distance” and “Bubble Has No Answers” mimic the build-ups of SMD’s harder past releases but in a drawn-out and dream-like state—when the beat does drop halfway through these mini-odysseys, it’s muted and disconnected, like hearing a raging party from beneath a tranquil Ibiza swimming pool.However, this is far from a party record. Clocking in at just over an hour in length, Welcome to Sideways is a study in dance music rather than a practice, one of those albums where skipping to a desired track is useless, as its meant to be experienced as a whole suite. “Remember in Reverse” begins with a soothing loop that’s gradually overcome by stacked glitches and fades until it reaches soaring altitude, and the seven-and-a-half minute closer “Drone Follows Me Everywhere” is SMD at their most oppressive, one pounding beat layered with a lead blanket of dark synths. For an act that has seen it’s biggest dividends producing easily consumable techno-pop, this variation might seem like a risk, and if Ford and Shaw hadn't already built a sturdy reputation as analogue technicians, it would be. But SMD have been doing this for a long time, and know how to toe the thin line between hypnosis and boredom. This album may not be their most compelling release to date, but it remains the work of two uniquely complementary musicians set on an ever-evolving path.Earlier this summer, a story began to circulate about “Shinrin-yoku,” a coinage created by the Japanese Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries in the early ‘80s that basically translates as “forest bathing.” It’s not hiking or trail exploring per se (nor is it, as the name might suggest, stripping naked and bathing in a pile of leaves), so much as it is a meditation that provide its bathers “an opportunity to slow down, appreciate things that can only be seen or heard when one is moving slowly,” as one guide put it. He expects it to be a trend not unlike yoga in the future. Naturally, the documentation is sparse on the health benefits of “forest bathing,” though researchers have focused on the phytoncides given off by the plants, the so-called “aroma of the forest.”The emergence of “Shinrin-yoku” dovetails nicely with the most recent reissues of Wolfgang Voigt’s GAS project. It, too, draws on the image of the forest and the density of its landscape, perhaps even drawing its name from the vaporous, relaxing properties of said “aroma.”One of many of Voigt’s production aliases, GAS, ran for five years in total, producing four full-lengths and a handful of singles, before coming to an end in 2000 with Pop. At that point in time in the new century, there were dozens of projects that could be traced back to Voigt’s industrious, multifaceted genius—from the maniacal, Pantone minimal techno of Studio 1 to the gateway drug of Burger/Ink’s Las Vegas (one of the earliest German techno albums to see domestic release in the US)– but the vagaries of Voigt’s GAS project were hard to pin down. The intent of GAS—as Voigt stated in an interview from that time—consisted of seeming contradictions: “The aim is always pop and to bring the German forest to the disco.” Or to take the club into the forest. That synergy—between the natural and electronic, the ancient and modern, the metered and the untamed, the infinite and the temporal—came together and then disappeared.While nearly impossible to compile a linear chronology for his discography—which includes more than 160 albums and 40 aliases—in the intervening years since these pivotal albums were released, their influence has overshadowed his own prodigal body of work. So while the four original GAS records were boxed and compiled merely eight years ago, Nah Und Fern infuriated many fans in that each album was reduced to an edit on a single side of vinyl, cutting hours of music into just one hour. And so now we are being given the simply and monolithically titled Box: a deluxe set featuring ten pieces of vinyl (each album is now spread across three sides, with another piece containing his 1999 12,” “Oktember”), an art book of Voigt’s manipulated forest photos, as well as four CDs.Box presents Voigt’s vision in its most momentous physical document to date and is a fitting monument. But it also looks back and edits the history in such a manner that brings to mind fellow countrymen Kraftwerk, who disavowed their first three albums they made before hitting upon the technological themes of Autobahn. Box also functions similarly to William Basinski’s massive 9-LP box set from 2012, arranging his archive of crumbling tape loops in a post-9/11 world as The Disintegration Loops, giving bookends and a coherent narrative to a project that during its creation and lifespan did not always bear one.Originally, GAS was but one of Voigt’s innumerable pseudonyms, first arising in 1995 as a remix of his own sampledelic cover of T. Rex’s “Hot Love.” GAS may have ultimately been a defining quality of the moniker but it’s easy it also easy to hear in it an homage to T. Rex’s own languid “Life’s a Gas” and Voigt’s beloved glam rock. When he spun off GAS with its own 12”, it was decidedly more ambient, though there were bits of glam and disco still deeply embedded in the productions.That history is elided completely here. As Box now posits, GAS begins two years on with 1997’s Zauberberg. It’s the first instance of Voigt presenting GAS as a unified sound and vision. There’s a blurred photo of black trees bathed in a demonic red light on the cover, as if a forest fire blazes just out of frame, and the music itself reveals—and revels in—a far more somber tone. The glitter of glam is replaced with soot, as Voigt ventures further back in time, sampling and looping late 19th century-early 20th century composers like Richard Wagner, Alban Berg, and Arnold Schoenberg. Not that you can quite make out the motifs, as he slows such works until they become dirges, the crackle of the original vinyl casting off a campfire-like warmth, putting the techno producer on ground similar to that of experimental turntable manipulator Philip Jeck.The opening minutes of Zauberberg’s first track drifts through an indeterminate number of orchestral loops before dissolving into mist. They drift between drone and slowed melody, focal point and blur, foreground and background, sound and decay. That approach remained intact throughout GAS’ duration. As Philip Sherburne put it eight years ago, reviewing a rare live performance from GAS: “The point of GAS isn’t the moment or the riff; it’s the totality. I’d be unable to tell you the title of a given GAS track, or even the record.”Voigt had a lot of different approaches, so many that he had to keep switching aliases to contain them. For this particular project, Voigt only has one pitch, but it’s a doozy. His narcotic way with these loops, his ability to shift them in space, to slow them down even as the pulse beneath them intensifies, to ever-so-carefully alter the repetition so that it mystifies rather than lulls, remains unmatched. He muffles his telltale kick drum so that rather than shake a club's walls, it now seems to emanate from twelve feet under the forest floor. It’s as much a haunted memory of these nearly century-old classical recordings as it is a vague impression of last night's endless party, and as such GAS exists in a purgatorial state between the two.Despite spending nearly two decades with the albums, I’d be hard-pressed to distinguish the twenty-four tracks here. Mostly, the tints on each cover suggest the moods within. Zauberberg remains the most menacing, suggestive of being submerged in a lake or lost in the darkest hours of night. The next year, Königsforst—while still dark—suggests more glints of light. The amber glow on the cover is conveyed by the harps that plink across “II” and the majestic brass growling on “V.” Taking its title from the woods that Voigt himself grew up in, dosing on LSD as a teen and wandering amid the trees, Königsforst reconfigures Voigt’s memories as Brothers Grimm fairytale, seeing nature as an enchanted landscape.Pop ranges the farthest of the GAS albums, it’s opening moments warm and gurgling. Elsewhere, the swells are reminiscent of New Age music, which at the time was still widely scorned. The very next year, the chiming bells that bounce around on “IV” would become the foundation of Kompakt’s Pop Ambient sound. (In a strange twist, the A-side of the original “Oktember” single is replaced here with “Tal 90,” a track credited to Tal and released on the second Pop Ambient comp, by far the gentlest GAS track on the set and an outlier in its use of guitar as its foundation.) By the time that telltale darkness returns for the last fifteen minutes of Pop, the project feels like a riddle closing in on itself, resolving on a note that’s both ominous and transcendent at once.Box both cements Voigt’s legacy yet it also threatens to overshadow it, collecting and solidifying a haunting body of work that echoes not just through techno, but all music as the 20th century came to its end. No other project of Voigt’s created quite as much of an obsession amongst its listeners. It’s possible to hear Voigt move through post-rock, modern classical, noise and electronic: Godspeed You! Black Emperor, Max Richter, Eluvium, Tim Hecker, Andy Stott, Sunn O))), the Orb (at least in the 21st century), the Caretaker, Jóhan Jóhannsson, the Field, most entrants in the annual Pop Ambient series, they are just a few of the modern music makers who imbibed these albums and realized their own work.Last year, Dr. Christopher Dooks published a paper/sound piece entitled “Lessons Learned in the Königsforst,” wherein the interdisciplinary artist trekked to the forest outside of Cologne, obsessed by the album that he’s used for years as a sleep aid, an album that “taps into something potentially universal to aid stress reduction, almost as a medication.” He goes on to compare Königsforst to the sound of hearing your mother’s heartbeat in utero, to the Buddhist practice of a walking meditation, to coming down off of drugs and our modern “hyper-aroused” state of existence, to the album being a possible treatment for PTSD. In chatting with Voigt about it, the producer said the project was “about childhood dreams and traumatic fantasies, about (drug) paranoia and very special trippy ‘inner ear’ tinnitus adventure worlds.” It’s a suspension of time in both its exploration of extended duration, as well as in blurring the sensations that inform childhood and intoxicated adult realms.Clocking in at over four hours, Box can still be a foreboding listen. Many might still only hear a migraine-level thump and the hiss around it, while others can behold the infinite depths of space that Voigt suggests between each beat, luxuriating in each lurch of ghostly strings. Nearly twenty years later, GAS still assaults our presumptions about electronic music. How can music that seems to be monotonous, so uneventful, also convey such beauty and clarity? Why take a slow walk through the forest when there is so much to get done on any given day?In explaining the health benefits of “Shinrin-yoku,” one researcher suggested that it’s not the aroma of the trees that gives such bathers a sense of calm, but rather from a sense of “awe,” be it astronauts gazing down at the earth, tourists taking in the Grand Canyon, or even a young man recalling the forest from his youth. The expanse and vastness of GAS reveals as much as the listeners are willing give to them, the level of attention and perception helping to create such awe. Whether it’s your first visit or a return trip into this world, the ability to travel into each track unaccompanied by Voigt yet find your own trail is part of what makes this music resonate decades later. In this way, GAS continues to confer such medicinal, even magical, qualities upon its visitors.Viral bubblegum rap star and self-proclaimed “King of the Teens,” Lil Yachty first introduced his motley crew of young stooges, the Sailing Team, on the Summer Songs 2 posse cut “All In.” It was a bubbly team theme that could double as a nursery rhyme. “All my brothers with me!” he shouted in the intro. That distinction somehow excluded R&B phenom Kodie Shane, the crew’s sole female voice, and unequivocally its most talented member. Her short, sweet verse stood out brightly from the half-cocked joke raps, ending with confidence: “I’m tired of talking, can you cut my check?” Shane established herself early on as more than a wave-rider—she’s a rising tide lifting all boats. If Perry is Yachty’s first mate, then Kodie is their anchor. Following the breakthrough, her new EP, Zero Gravity, makes a strong impression.Born in Atlanta but raised in a Chicago suburb, Shane is a product of both nature and nurture. As a baby, she traveled on tour with her sister’s platinum-selling R&B group, Blaque, and later returned to Atlanta, where she recorded her first songs at 14. It was local guru Coach K—a manager of Gucci Mane and Young Jeezy, and mentor to Shane—who later introduced her to Yachty. For much of the past year, Shane has been toying with ideas and tinkering with form: Her 2060 EP, released in March, trended toward the productions of trap it-boys Metro Boomin and TM88 before randomly, dramatically turning to sample things like Rufus & Chaka Khan’s “Ain’t Nobody.” It was scattered, but it showed off the range and arsenal of a prodigious writer who has spent her life around musicians. A few months later, the sugary, genre-scanning Little Rocket explored Shane’s pop sense.A highlight of it all was 2060’s Yachty duet “Sad,” a candy-coated jam about unrequited love and the solace that can sometimes be found in bitter moments. Shane and Yachty are kindred spirits who pull the best out of each other, and their collaboration provided an important benchmark for Shane: the precise moment where everything clicked. It’s no surprise, then, that “Sad” resurfaces on Zero Gravity, which is, as its title implies, a study in weightlessness.Zero Gravity is a bite-sized compilation of old tracks and new ones, showcasing Shane’s seemingly limitless potential; it’s compact but full, animated yet balanced, marrying the buoyancy of Yachty (on a song like “Losing Service”) with the lucid journaling of Tink. She, like Tink, is a rapper and singer who blurs the line between the two (see: “A Ok”). But she’s far more explosive, with an impish warble that quickly morphs into a liquid falsetto, a playful chirp, or even a mopey whimper in a snap. This dynamism is obvious on the hook-heavy “Drip in My Walk,” which is the song most in-line with the Yachty canon here. She cycles through a few subtle inflection changes before settling for flat out exuberance, her natural state.Listening to Shane feels rejuvenating. There’s a very particular energy to some of her songs that replicates tumbling around in a bouncy house. But there can be a delicacy to them, too, when her writing ventures into mature(r), more thoughtful R&B. In any mode, Shane meticulously crafts tunes that stay with you. She has the nuanced ear for melody that continues to elude Yachty, but her hooks are equally infectious, as she unspools skipping refrains with sweet, almost chant-like variations. Shane is a more complete songwriter, too; her ideas find resolution, especially on “Drip in My Walk” and “Can You Handle It”—the former seeing an extended basketball metaphor through to the end. Still, she fits her team’s bubblegum aesthetic perfectly. Even as her songs constantly move, they’re easy to follow. Yachty may be the internet’s star of today, but all signs point to Shane as a star of the future.The Syrian Civil War started five years ago, following the violent response of Bashar al-Assad’s security forces to protests in the southern city of Deraa. Nationwide opposition demanded Assad’s resignation, which was met by swift and violent governmental retribution. In the years since, the violence has widened to an unimaginable scope: a multi-front conflict with numerous international and domestic players vying for control or stability of the region. In April, a UN envoy estimated that as many as 400,000 have been killed as a result of the conflict, and millions of Syrians (some estimates say 11 million) have been displaced from their homes, becoming the subject of a global refugee crisis. In the election cycles of the past year, Syrian refugees have been used as a scapegoat by any number of demagogues to stoke fear in people that their communities and jobs will be threatened by a slow encroaching wave of “otherness.” Just two days after the British people chose to leave the European Union in a controversial referendum colloquially known as Brexit, in London at the Southbank Centre’s Royal Festival Hall, Damon Albarn and the music collective Africa Express organized a concert with 50 musicians from the Syrian National Orchestra. (Damon Albarn recorded with the Syrian National Orchestra for the Gorillaz’ 2010 album Plastic Beach, beginning a longstanding love affair with the region’s music.) Many of the musicians in this venerable troupe have been scattered across the globe, stranded behind miles of red tape.The event almost didn’t happen. A week before the rehearsals for the concerts were supposed to begin, it wasn’t yet clear if the organizers were going to be able to get Schengen visas for the 50 Syrian musicians to secure flights. The Guardian mentions “dark rumors about desperate calls to British officials”; apparently Africa Express co-founder Ian Birrell chartered a Boeing 737 for the musicians.But it did happen, and the concert is finally being offered as an album. During a year when multiculturalism and globalism enduring a severe, sustained battering, the Syrian National Orchestra help prove that beauty, and true sublimity in art can exist even in the most pernicious and divisive of atmospheres. For those who celebrate the heterogenous, open-armed, and loving embrace of a global music community, this two-hour-plus concert one June night in the Royal Festival Hall represents a kind of small victory, as well as an incredible night of music. The musical canvas for the project is vast. There is a traditional string orchestra onstage, accompanied by players of Arabian instruments like the ney (a kind of flute), string instruments like the qanun, zither, oud, and kora. In front of this assemblage are performers like Damon Albarn, Julia Holter, Paul Wells, and more. One of the first things you notice, listening, is the gobsmacking virtuosity of the players involved. In the thirteen minute track “Al Dahleh,” stand outs like ney player Moslem Rahal and Feras Charestan on the Arabian lap harp display stunning technical prowess.  The performance is met with multiple ovations, and as an exercise in technical genius it is astounding. This group of players hadn't seen each other in years, and they cohere seamlessly.Elsewhere, Julia Holter’s “Feel You” (a track from her resonant 2015 LP Have You in My Wilderness) is transformed by the presence of the Syrian orchestra. Here, it is more than just a piece of lush orchestral pop; it is a cross-cultural paean, proving collaborators who don’t share the same worldly experience can radically transform a piece of art, often for the better. Damon Albarn told The Guardian when organizing this event he said he was disappointed by the rhetoric surrounding the crisis as a “homogenous shadow” to be feared. What he wanted to do with this event is to show an audience the “experience to humanity” that these refugees can express in their art. Some of these musicians still live in Syria, dodging danger so they can continue to practice. Defying all bureaucracy, borders, and strife, this concert and this orchestra proves that art at its very best is a grand gesture of empathy above all.  Experimental producer and sound artist Yair Elazar Glotman has an unparalleled knack for wresting gold from uncomfortable sounds. With the album he released under the moniker KETEV in 2014, Glotman gutted the basic operating principles of techno. KETEV’s music is rife with vaporous rhythmic apparitions that resemble dance beats, even if you can't touch them physically. Likewise, on his 2015 album Études, released under his own name, Glotman basically threw his classical acoustic bass training out the window in favor of hacking the strings with the bow to make solemn dark ambient drones. And yet Études has a certain grace of form that even an untrained ear can readily trace back to classical music. With the debut of his new project Blessed Initiative, he ventures into even more forbidding territory. This time, Glotman, who works in sound installations and film scores, drew mainly from foley recordings. Blessed Initiative begins with a sound that resembles a huffing car muffler, digitally chopped up to create the sensation of air being sucked out of the listening space. On an instinctual level, the listener can't help but feel a sense of suffocation—an effect that Glotman plays up by introducing gurgling and splashing sounds. And when a human voice suddenly appears and gets choked away, it’s as if we’re listening to a person drown. It's gripping, astonishing, and nearly unbearable. “Jazz as commodity,” the album’s cleverly titled second track, deposits us in a similarly unsettling place. At first, the piece is completely devoid of rhythm or melody. We hear only a perforating sound—something like a door opening and echoing across the expanse of a parking garage. Glotman builds a beat out of multiple layers so that eventually it takes on the character of a heavy-footed creature dragging chains. “Xanax interlude (relax!)” features a stereo panorama of crunching sounds that might make Matmos shiver, bringing to mind the magnified acoustics of insects moving through soil, while “Delirium juice & taste of jewelry,” reprises the air-sucking and bubbling effects of the album's opening. The sensations induced by these works can be profoundly unsettling. Yet, as usual, Glotman’s brand of discomfort never loses its flow and, on repeated listens, even acquires a certain majesty. The history of experimental music is littered with records that give bragging rights to anyone with the stamina to endure them. Blessed Initiative doesn’t fit that mold. Much to Glotman’s credit, there are moments where he is utterly convincing at bringing the sound-installation experience to you. His skillful placement of natural (or at least natural-seeming) reverberation casts the composer as an architect, someone who could have spent hours drawing blueprints for these tracks as much as he spent working on the KYMA software system he used to generate and manipulate some of the sounds. Blessed Initiative would be intriguing enough based only on its visceral sense of physical pace. But there’s more dimension to Glotman’s process than that. You glimpse his vision most clearly in second half of “Delirium juice & taste of jewelry”; as dozens of wind chimes clatter, Glotman frames them as if they’re doing so in an indoor space, i.e: without wind. You end up with the distinct sense of having stumbled upon something magical, an unseen force bringing these inanimate objects to life. As with the rest of the album, Glotman scoops the music of any traces of human presence, which makes you feel as if there’s no one else around to witness this strange and beautiful event. Describing it is impossible, and no one will believe you, but you know you were lucky to experience something special—much like this album as a whole.“Things here have changed,” announces a computerized voice at the end of Peace Trail, the scrappy and strange new album by Neil Young. The song is called “My New Robot” and it might be about a recent divorcee taking comfort in the presence of “Alexa,” the voice-activated feature of Amazon’s new household device Echo. But those four words at the end, which introduce a barrage of online sounds (requesting to swipe your card, enter your pin number, your mother’s maiden name) hint at the bigger picture behind the record. As a songwriter, Neil Young has always thrived in shaky times. Whether it’s the deflated hippy dreams of his mid-seventies Ditch Trilogy or the road-weary breakup anthems that comprised 1992’s Harvest Moon, Neil’s best work often feels like a gut reaction to turbulence.More than any album since 2006’s Living With War—the Bush-era treatise that called for impeachment and looked to Obama as a beacon of hope—Peace Trail is a product of its time. Its ten sparse protest songs address the dissemination of fake news, the mistreatment of America’s indigenous people, and the water crisis in Flint. As suggested by his open letter about Standing Rock, Young remains a vigilant and thoughtful observer, staying up to date on important issues and fighting for what he believes is right. And while the songs on Peace Trail are unquestionably timely and occasionally poignant, Young’s songwriting-as-immediate-response sometimes fails him. His musings throughout the album often scan as non-sequitur sentimentality (“Up in the rainbow teepee sky/No one’s looking down on you or I”) or just plain non-sequitur (“Bring back the days when good was good”). You get the sense his goal here was to finish the songs as quickly as possible (maybe so he could perform nearly half the album at Desert Trip Festival), when a few more days of editing might have resulted in a more powerful listen.The same hurried approach Young takes with the lyrics, however, actually benefits the overall sound of the record. After last year’s Monsanto Years, Young has ditched his Promise of the Real backing band, whose tentative roots rock recalled, at best, a small town Crazy Horse cover band. On Peace Trail, he’s accompanied by two session musicians who mostly make themselves scarce. Most songs feature only Neil’s acoustic guitar along with unobtrusive bass and delicate, brush-stroked drums. It results in an album that feels refreshingly unlabored and current. On two tracks, Young even adopts an Auto-Tune vocal effect (maybe something he picked up from jamming with D.R.A.M.?). On Earth, the bizarro live album he released earlier this year, the effect was used as a commentary on inorganic food; on Peace Trail, it’s no joke. In the nearly-spoken-word “My Pledge,” Young’s Auto-Tuned harmonies aid the inscrutable narrative (which seems to connect the voyage of the Mayflower with our attraction to iPhones and maybe also the death of Jimi Hendrix?) with a disorienting layered effect.Two of the most effective songs on Peace Trail happen to be the ones least directly associated with the headlines. “Can’t Stop Workin’” offers an insight into Young’s creative process, borrowing a chord progression from his estranged colleague David Crosby while also hinting at a possible reunion: “I might take some time off,” he sings, “for forgiveness.” “Glass Accident,” meanwhile, uses breaking glass and the dangerous mess it makes as a metaphor for lack of accountability in the U.S. government (“Too many pieces there for me to clean up/So I left a warning message by the door”). Even more than the disquieting, if distractingly literal, narratives of tracks like “Show Me” and “Indian Givers,” these songs examine Young’s values at this stage in his career and illustrate his strength in communicating his concerns. And while Young’s voice has certainly never sounded older than it does here, there’s something youthful about his energy. Besides the fact that his two-album-a-year-clip keeps him in pace with your Ty Segalls or John Dwyers, his music is guided by a restless determination to cover new ground and speak his mind. “Don’t think I’ll cash it in yet… I keep planting seeds ’til something new is growing,” he sings in the title track: it’s long been both his gift and his curse.With their detuned guitars, plodding tempos, permanently downcast expressions, and hardware-store dress code, Soundgarden looked every bit the “grunge” part, at least on first glance. If your first introduction came, for instance, via the image of frontman Chris Cornell baring his chest on a dimly lit soundstage in the video for “Loud Love,” you could easily mistake Soundgarden for a bunch of oafs wading in the same tarpit where the brontosaur remains of Black Sabbath and Led Zeppelin lay fossilized. In fact, at points on their 1989 sophomore album/major-label debut Louder Than Love, Soundgarden came off as a ham-fisted Zep/Sabbath mashup.Clearly, the band underwent a period of profound growth sometime prior to recording Badmotorfinger, the 1991 follow-up that captures the band clicking on all cylinders. In its breadth and execution, Badmotorfinger dramatically surpasses the band's previous work. (Just don’t judge by the even more oafish video for leadoff single “Outshined”). The album also sustains a level of focus, cohesion, and intensity that the band’s later, more varied albums lack. It is also the moment where Soundgarden’s unique four-way interplay comes into alignment in earnest, along with their collective sense of songcraft and ability to create atmosphere.In the oversized coffee table booklet that accompanies the seven-disc “super deluxe” version of this reissue, three dozen musicians offer their recollections, including Henry Rollins, Les Claypool, Vernon Reid, Kirk Hammett, Buzz Osborne, Dale Crover, Krist Novoselic, Tom Morello, Steve Von Till, etc, etc. High praise even comes from ancestral giants like Zeppelin leader Jimmy Page, Sabbath bassist Geezer Butler, and Rush guitarist Alex Lifeson. The mental image of Lifeson cranking Badmotorfinger with his kids, as suggested by his notes, is probably the most endearing. Sadly, though, Mudhoney’s Mark Arm doesn't re-tell the story of how, on hearing the final mix for the first time, he sent the band a postcard with the disparaging note: “Fuck, you guys sound like Rush now.” Though Louder Than Love cemented the band’s appeal with metal audiences, Soundgarden had first struck a national chord among college radio deejays who were keyed-in on the band’s underground pedigree. After working with the iconic independent label Sup Pop on their debut EP Screaming Life in 1987, Soundgarden initially turned down major label offers to release their debut full-length, 1988’s Ultramega OK, on SST, the venerated indie imprint founded by Black Flag’s Greg Ginn. Those two releases in particular reflected the band’s affinity for underground/post-punk acts like Hüsker Dü, Bad Brains, and Sonic Youth.In the new Badmotorfinger liners, Jello Biafra likens Soundgarden to a cross between Zeppelin and Killing Joke. But it’s not like the post-punk influences jump out at you on Badmotorfinger. That’s because, by that point, Chris Cornell and lead guitarist Kim Thayil had combined their individual guitar approaches into a complex latticework that remains somewhat inscrutable even as it grips you. For every Badmotorfinger passage that makes you want to bust into a fit of air guitar—the unevenly metered, Sherman tank trudge that closes “Rusty Cage,” the blues-metal crunch of “Drawing Flies,” the quasi-thrash gallop of “Jesus Christ Pose,” etc.—the music is rife with ten times as many intangibles. To choose just one, then there’s the high-end ambient buzz that permeates the album from start to finish, imbuing it with a static charge not unlike the electricity one feels in the air when entire sky darkens under a massive storm cloud.Indeed, much of Badmotorfinger’s power resides in its suggestion of a violence that rarely erupts and offers little catharsis when it does. The best example can be found on “Slaves and Bulldozers,” a seething seven-minute crawl where Thayil spends most of the time strangulating his guitar strings for spasms of noise that almost seem to emanate from an inhuman source. If you've ever been rendered speechless by the sight of the ocean, stars, volcanic activity—anything that suddenly makes you aware of your minuscule place in the order of life—Thayil’s “leads” (if they can even be called that) surge with the same coldly neutral ferocity.Meanwhile, even when Cornell unleashes his famous throat-scraping roar on the line “now I know why you’ve been shaking,” the enormity of the music feels choked back rather than triumphant. In sharp contrast to other heavy music—which is mostly designed to take frustration out on external targets—Soundgarden's signature rumble doesn’t give you an athletic rush. All of that gnashing turmoil on “Slaves and Bulldozers” actually points inward, collecting in your muscle tissue as a kind of seismic potential energy. And when the entire band pulls back for Cornell to switch to a bluesy murmur before the song’s wailing climax, Soundgarden show a command of dynamics they simply hadn’t been capable of before.  As you listen more closely, it becomes increasingly apparent that none of the songs lend themselves to primary hues like “angry,” “sad,” or even “rocking.” In its most rousing moments, Badmotorfinger is anchored by a pensiveness that fosters daydreaming as much if not more than it gives you reason to bang your head. Fittingly, the album’s lyrics venture well beyond heavy rock’s typical purview: Where other bands would choose to emote more directly from the gut (or elsewhere), Soundgarden temper the attack of the music with painterly images Cornell delivers with Beatnik flair. On “Room a Thousand Years Wide,” Thayil’s refrain of “tomorrow begat tomorrow” extends the song’s ambiguously woebegone perspective over timeless eons. And though bassist Ben Shepherd’s “Somewhere” doesn’t quite disclose itself as a love song, the sense of romance is undeniable in lines like “From the likes of her/To the time of me/Like the moon to earth/Or the sky to sea./Only we’re no longer/Allowed to be.”Badmotorfinger is also anchored by drummer Matt Cameron’s inimitable way of dragging the beat back while also smoothing-out Cornell and Thayil’s preference for uneven time signatures. Even on punkish uptempo bangers like “Rusty Cage” and “Face Pollution,” Soundgarden never simply barrel forward, switching gears on a dime and moving sideways with the dexterity of a prog act. (Hence Mark Arm’s Rush comparison.)With all four members stretching more than ever before, at several points the music verges on the transportive, head-trip vibe of space rock or psychedelia. On the dreamlike “Searching with My Good Eye Closed” swirls of guitar twine around Cornell’s voice, heavily draped in reverb to give it the weight of a mystical presence speaking through clouds. When playing together in a room, the band tended to lumber through the song—evidenced painfully by the bonus concert and demo versions included in the deluxe package.Speaking of which: The studio outtakes here may be interesting from a forensic point of view, but they’re basically glorified demos that lack the agility of the finished songs. And while the version of “Black Rain”—with lyrics that would later be refitted for the Superunknown hit “Fell on Black Days”—works as a curio, the song selection could have gone deeper to include the early version of “No Attention,” a tune the band attempted during the Badmotorfinger sessions before settling on a later version for 1996’s Down on the Upside.In its definitive form, though, “Searching with My Good Eye Closed” is the most dramatic example of Soundgarden’s ability to touch the otherworldly. If you listen very closely to the fade out, you can hear the last wisp of Cornell’s voice trailing off: It’s barely audible and lasts for just half a second before it's smothered out of the frame by the leaden trudge of “Room a Thousand Years Wide.” The same thing essentially happened with the band’s career two years later, when Soundgarden went on to sell five million and became alterna-rock household names with their next album, 1994’s Superunknown. Much like when a director known for working in black and white switches to color, the obvious change in palette is initially what dazzles about Superunknown.But as both albums have aged, you could make a case that Soundgarden actually accomplished more with the comparatively limited shading of Badmotorfinger. Listening back now it’s an album that would have sounded fresh and vital released at any time over the past quarter century. The band didn’t do the music any favors with that dreadfully dated “Outshined” video, but it doesn’t take long for Badmotorfinger to reveal itself as something far greater than a relic of its time.The cover art for Relationships features a photo of an entryway, nearly every inch of its canary yellow walls covered in signatures, writing and drawings. The photo was taken inside of Nick Hook’s studio in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, where the producer has recorded and worked with a laundry list of hip-hop and electronic artists over the years, including Run the Jewels, Young Thug, and Action Bronson. Relationships, his debut album, feels a lot like that studio must: a place where Hook endlessly tinkers as a constant stream of guests passes through, each leaving behind bits of their sound. In keeping with Hook’s penchant for collaboration, Relationships enlists an impressive roster of artists: the freshly Drake-co-signed 21 Savage, the Deftones’ Chino Moreno, electro wunderkind Hudson Mohawke and even the late DJ Rashad. To hear him tell it, Hook didn’t pay for any of these features, relying instead on the goodwill accrued through years of production and engineering work.Given the diverse company he keeps, it should come as no surprise that Hook’s debut is an eclectic listen. That said, Relationships manages to hang together surprisingly well, anchored in large part by Hook’s rhythmic and melodic sensibilities. Hook is a collector of vintage studio equipment and it shows: The sounds of analog synths suffuse these songs with warmth, while much of the drum programming has a tactile, human feel. Also old-fashioned is the manner in which Relationships was constructed: all of these collaborations were recorded in person at Hook’s studio, rather than cobbled together from emailed files.Clearly, Hook is a big believer in chemistry, and this collaborative spirit tends to bring out his best. Over the course of Relationships, Hook allows his guests to pull his sound in a number of different directions, ultimately showcasing his own versatility. “Gucci’s” pitches up emerging Atlanta rapper 24hrs’ vocals into cartoon-character territory, the end result sounding like a trap banger crossbred with early Kanye’s chipmunk soul. “Can’t Tell Me Nothing,” a bleak grime number featuring 19-year old London rapper Novelist, colorfully evokes London’s wet streets: Hook’s synths alternately patter like raindrops and howl like sirens as Novelist raps with hungry-upstart fury. “Another Way” arrives at funky body music by way of cosmic synths, while “All Alone” matches Makonnen’s late night tomcat croon with the proper shade of noir. Given 21 Savage’s involvement and its title, you can probably guess what “Head” is about; more surprising is how exuberant the song feels—bass drum hits that pop like confetti-filled balloons, skittering hi-hats, glimmering synth lines. It’s a genuinely fun song, one where Savage sounds delightfully out-of-place, like a dead-eyed hustler at a child’s birthday party.Relationships is bookended by two collaborations with the footwork pioneer DJ Rashad, culled from sessions Hook recorded with Rashad before his untimely death. Opening track “+ 3,” which also features DJ Paypal, has Rashad’s fingerprints all over it: classic house synths, a tug-of-war between a thudding low-end and rapid-fire hi-hats and a mantra-like chant, provided by Nasty Nigel: “Pull up/Back door/ID/Plus three.” Album closer “The Infinite Loop,” meanwhile, ends the record on a very different note. Good luck finding Rashad’s contribution in the folds of the impressionistic track, which builds up slowly over the course of eighteen minutes, guided primarily by washes of chiming, delayed guitar provided by Chino Moreno. Nasty Nigel returns here, with a brief, nostalgic verse that steers into the track’s dreamy atmospherics: “Copping 40s at the Wawa outside of Philly/I was only 14, kinda high, my uncle with me.” Even if it hardly sounds like a DJ Rashad song, “The Infinite Loop” feels like a fitting tribute, a contemplative remembrance of a relationship that animated Hook’s work, like so many of those on display here.After spending fifteen years—nearly half of his life—writing, recording and touring with the Icelandic band Sigur Rós, composer Kjartan Sveinsson finally decided in 2013 that he was ready for something else. In his time with the band, Sveinsson was responsible for bringing classical elements to Sigur Rós’ music, but since branching out on his own he has leapt completely into the composing world. Beginning with an orchestral and choral piece performed (but never released) in 2010 called “Credo,” Sveinsson began to establish that he not only had an ear for beautiful melodies but also possessed the trickier skill of understanding of how to properly conjure grandeur. He followed that work with scores to two films by fellow Icelander Rúnar Rúnarsson, the austere Volcano (2011) and Sparrows (2015), as well as two collaborations with artist Ragnar Kjartansson, each of which showcased his ability to write for context and to match sight with sound. Der Klang der Offenbarung des Göttlichen, with a title loosely translated from German to mean “The Explosive Sonics of Divinity,” is Sveinsson’s third collaboration with Kjartansson, and by far his most substantive work yet. Unlike “SS Hangover” and “Take Me Here By the Dishwasher,” each of which were conceptual art pieces for which Sveinsson composed a durational accompaniment, Der Klang is a complete work, one that stands majestically on its own. Although structured as an opera, it diverges significantly from the form, featuring neither stage actors nor any kind of evident storytelling. Broken into four “acts” titled “Teil” I-IV, each piece was performed as an aural backdrop to a series of minimalistic, static sets designed by Kjartansson, with only subtle environmental changes to the set (flashing lights, burning fires, background colors changing) over the course of each’s running time. The sets’ visuals are elegantly designed but their simplicity belies the more complex beauty of the music itself. While there are no actors onstage, there are vocals across the latter three compositions, which in performances were delivered by a chorus located in the orchestra pit. And there is, if not a libretto a connection to a story, apparently inspired by Nobel Laureate Halldór Laxness’ novel World Light, but it is entirely impressionistic. World Light is about the life of a young poet seeking greatness whose expectations for success aren’t ever met, causing him to seek solace and and beauty in his own failure.“Teil I” stands out from the following three pieces, for being both the lone track without vocals as well as for its brooding and ominous mood. Kjartansson’s set for “Teil I” was a backdrop of a rocky sea bay on a dark gray night, with only waves moving across the screen, but the music adds its own suggested image to this tableau—a ghost ship approaching or departing slowly, perhaps. The seesawing string melodies slowly evolve into piercing glissandi so cacophonous it nearly shuts down the senses; its extreme simplicity only serves to enhance its power.The following two compositions illuminate the grey skies with rays of sunlight, however faint. “Teil II” begins with a funereal choral piece reminiscent of “Orphic Hymn,” from Jóhann Jóhannsson’s Orphée earlier this year. The vocal intonations continue unaccompanied for three minutes before being joined by a sea of violins and cellos, which gently provide counterpoint by infusing a delicate sense of hope into the proceedings. Though not exactly sunny, on “Teil III,” another orchestral-choral work, Sveinsson turns tentatively towards more optimistic stirrings. It’s curious that Kjartansson’s set piece is just a frame of a house burning down in the darkness of night, because it’s easy to imagine an entirely different visual—a film scene of hard-earned epiphany, maybe, a broken character realizing their lot and resolving to improve it. On the opera’s final evocative act, “Teil IV,” Sveinsson returns to this sense of human resolve of as our salvation. Beginning with a droning cello and wistful female alto, Der Klang’s closing piece speaks to the power of personal commitment in the face of struggles big or small. The chorus vocals soar as high as the strings themselves, surging like a tidal wave that mirrors the first piece, a wall of sound that is both crushing and somehow comforting.Der Klang boasts all the qualities we tend to associate with sweeping modern neo-classical—it's beautiful, reflective, sad. But to slap the commonly used “ethereal”  tag on it does it a disservice. Sveinsson has a light touch, but his work hits a deeper and more visceral level, permeating and lingering long after it’s subsided. Sveinsson has a preternatural sense of scale and pacing, and seeing how powerfully he can provide canvases for ephemeral pieces of art raises the question of how he would do trying his hand at something bigger: A traditional libretto-and-song opera, or to re-infuse his talents in the more open but anchored spaces of rock music. Whatever he does, he has already quietly announced himself as a major talent. The Rolling Stones have been the World’s Greatest Rock ‘n’ Roll Band™ for so long that, over the past three decades, they haven’t had to worry about being an especially good one. Since the mid-’80s, they’ve been releasing forgettable records at increasingly protracted intervals, all while their ever-extravagant world tours have taken on the feel of a traveling Hard Rock Café resort—a glitzy simulacrum of a rock’n’roll show catering to those who can afford to experience it. Fittingly, earlier this year the band went from being a proverbial museum piece to becoming an actual one.The knock on the Stones isn’t that they’re too old to play a young man’s game—even at 73, Mick Jagger can still run laps around performers a third his age—but that aging has brought no greater depth or texture to their music. What the Stones have lost over the years is not their capacity for raunchy rock’n’roll, but their ability to invest it with purpose and meaning. Jagger and Keith Richards used to be among the best (and most underrated) lyricists in rock; their last album was called A Bigger Bang and kicked off with a tune that included a “cock” pun in the opening verse.However, the Stones’ new album is as introspective as we can expect them to get in 2016—even if it they are playing songs that are nearly as old as they are. Blue & Lonesome is a covers collection that pays tribute to the post-war Chicago blues that first got the Stones rolling and inspired their very name. And since then, the blues have served as the foundation the band can dig into whenever their sound threatens to turn too au courant, whether they were reacting to the hippy-dippy whimsy of Their Satanic Majesties Request with the sleazy acoustic struts of Beggars Banquet, or devoting a side of Black and Blue-era concert document Love You Live to Muddy Waters and Willie Dixon worship.But Blue & Lonesome represents more than just a back-to-basics mission, It’s the most honest music the Stones have released in years—not because the source material confers it with the patina of authenticity, but because the entire blues-covers concept is a tacit admission that they don’t really give a shit about being a contemporary concern anymore, so they’re just going to do something that feels good. (The record was reportedly spawned as a warm-up exercise for a postponed album of new material.) And now that the band are older than Muddy Waters or Howlin’ Wolf ever lived to be, they can fully inhabit the grizzled-bluesman archetype to which they've always aspired, and exude a genuine get-offa-my-lawn imperviousness to the modern world.Blue & Lonesome was bashed out in three days, and for the first time in eons, the Stones sound like a band playing together in the same room rather than one that travels on separate jets. Jagger is, naturally the star of the show—but not in his usual vampish ways. Whether he’s embodying the down-on-his-knees despair of Memphis Slim’s title track or playfully assuming the role of sad-sack cuckold on Little Johnny Taylor’s “Everybody Knows About My Good Thing,” his ageless voice sounds like it’s emanating from the middle of the band scrum rather than the lip of a catwalk. And while Chicago blues may have introduced the concept of jamming and guitar gods to the rock lexicon, Richards and Ronnie Wood’s grinding interplay ultimately plays a supporting role to Jagger’s harmonica honks, which cut through these songs like a rusty hacksaw with “Midnight Rambler”-worthy gusto.But as much as Blue & Lonesome plays it raw, it’s not all that raucous—the energy here is less rip-this-joint than rocking-chair steady. On paper, the idea of the Stones running roughshod over a set of classic blues tunes seems like a long-suffering fan’s dream. (The “best Stones album since Some Girls!” headlines practically write themselves.) However, what made the Stones the Stones wasn’t their purism—it was the sacrilegious impulse to corrupt their influences with their own singular swagger. But Blue & Lonesome is more about adhering to tradition than encouraging sedition. The Stones may be drinking from their fountain of youth here, but they’re content to just savor it rather than spit it back in our faces.On their best blues covers—Beggars Banquets’ “Prodigal Son,” Sticky Fingers’ “You Gotta Move,” Exile on Main Street’s “Shake Your Hips”—the Stones handled the songs like Ouija boards; they were less about paying homage to their heroes than channeling their sinister essence. Blue & Lonesome has flashes of that insidious inspiration: On the revved-up run through Howlin’ Wolf’s “Commit a Crime,” Jagger’s vocal oozes with implied violence overtop a repetitive, trance-inducing riff that rings like a police siren; on Little Walter’s “Hate to See You Go,” his pained baby-please-don’t-go pleas climax with an extended harmonica drone that threatens to swallow the song whole.But for the most part, Blue & Lonesome doesn’t aspire to be anything more than a good-time frolic among old pals (Eric Clapton cameos included), with the interchangeable, upbeat takes on Buddy Johnson’s “Just Your Fool” and Eddie Taylor’s “Ride ‘Em on Down” more conducive to knee-tapping in a seated supper club than tearing the roof off a juke joint. For an album rife with tales of heartache, duplicity, and death threats, it’s positively brimming with bonhomie. And, hey, given all the shit-talking Keith did at Mick’s expense in his autobiography, Life, that audible camaraderie is something of a minor miracle in and of itself.  On its own modest terms, Blue & Lonesome offers promising proof the Stones can still be a band instead of a brand.On his recent Hot 97 appearance with Funk Flex, Gucci Mane noted his immense desire to work with new artists that had risen during his time in prison. He name-dropped Lil Yachty, Dae Dae, 21 Savage, and, of course, the partner he collaborated on this new mixtape, 1017 vs. the World, with: Lil Uzi Vert. “Anybody who hot, and the kids say he hot, I think it’s hot” Gucci told Flex. This kind of talk would fit in nicely at any music label boardroom, but because it comes from Gucci Mane, a street-rap elder statesman with a proven track record of promoting and influencing new rappers—particularly in Atlanta—you trust that it comes from a good place. Gucci has been making good on his promise and, with the fourth project of his to be released in 2016, 1017 vs. the World brings Gucci’s slower tempo and aggressive style together with Lil Uzi Vert’s anime-tinged eccentricity and goofiness.Beyond Gucci’s desire to connect with a younger audience and make music with a young upstart, there’s not much of a meeting point between these two. Uzi is so elastic and cartoonish that it makes the already-traditional trap style of Gucci feel even older by comparison. The tape is certainly not bad, but the chemistry of collaboration is absent: The songs that work best for Gucci’s mellow, bass-heavy nonchalance don’t work as well as for Uzi because he sounds reined in, and the songs where Uzi bounces off the walls in his Nicktoons rockstar manner get bogged down by Gucci. They have a Who Framed Roger Rabbit dynamic, where Uzi is the elastic Roger and Gucci the plodding Eddie Valiant.There is something intriguing about the sound of Gucci's voice on Honorable C Note’s candy-colored beats, like the opening “Changed My Phone”; it doesn’t fully work, but you can feel him trying to work with a sound outside of his own. Gucci shines most when the sound is on his terms, such as in the Mannie Fresh-produced “Blonde Brigitte”; a heavy, sluggish record where Gucci can rap with adoration about “a black girl with blonde hair, green lipstick she look like a rainbow.” Uzi’s spastic irreverence, meanwhile, is better-served on the video game soundtrack production of “Today!!”The roster of producers on this brief tape is eclectic, but they can’t bridge the generation chasm. Since returning from prison, Gucci has sounded hearteningly strong if rarely inspired, and the implied madness that sparked much of his best material, from 2008 to 2010, has dissipated. It might have served him next to Uzi's playfulness and flippant disregard of masculinity, his “diamonds on my choker” and “I was watching Food Network and learned how to make the cake.” Uzi isn’t that far removed from Future or Young Thug, both frequent Gucci collaborators, but the difference between Uzi and Thug is that Thug came up under Gucci's tutelage. Thug is still a student, whereas Uzi has no connection to his elder, and it’s evident.In the beginning, New York’s White Material label prized an ethos of function over form, packaging gruff, no-frills techno in plain white sleeves. Their logo depicted a hard-hatted technician strapped to a telephone pole: “Working man’s techno,” read a phrase stamped on the label's first release. (There is an element of fantasy at work here; a few of the label's artists are RISD grads, and at least one works by day as a graphic designer.) None of the crew’s members stripped his records more mercilessly to the bone than co-founder Young Male, aka Quinn Taylor, who came up with the label’s slogan during a stint working in a hand tool factory. As recently as September, when he released Hot for Destiny and the Street, his second full EP for the label, Young Male was still applying himself primarily to stern, basement-quaking floor-fillers. His peers, meanwhile, had developed distinct musical identities: Galcher Lustwerk became known for his barbiturate house beats and hypnotic baritone; DJ Richard’s debut album, for Dial, put a chilly ambient spin on techno. Both producers’ music is unmistakable for the work of anyone else, but Young Male’s minor-key throb felt ego-free, a kind of ur-techno that was less about authorial genius than collective release: DJ tools meant to keep dancefloors running smoothly.Now, though, with his debut album, Taylor makes his own pivot toward auteur status. How to Disappear in America sounds unlike anything he’s done before. This is not a dance record. The tracks are short and sketch-like. The tempos are slow, the lighting crepuscular. A few tracks feature no beats at all, and when percussion does appear, it’s a rickety pitter-pat pulse that sounds as cutting-edge as the home organ in your great-aunt’s living room, and as hard-hitting as the tapping fingernails of an ASMR video.John Carpenter and Alan Howarth’s influence looms large over the record’s pensive pulses and gravelly pedal tones. How to Disappear in America resembles a soundtrack in other ways, too. Its titles read like film cues (“Franklin’s Theme,” “Into the Night,” “Fade”) and its pursuit of atmosphere is all-consuming. It is resolutely minor-key, and his analog synths have a bitter tinge to them.Occasionally, a pinprick of light punctuates the murk. “Muzak” makes surprising use of fretless bass and oily tenor saxophone, evoking the glass bricks and neon lights of a decades-old softcore video found in a discarded box of VHS tapes. And while “Carrier” is little more than a gloomy bass pulse buffeted by a cold, unforgiving wind, there's a hint of the Durutti Column in the silvery guitar line that sprouts from it like a sturdy desert cactus.Mostly, though, bleakness predominates. “Into the Night” channels the drone of bomber jets into a short, sinister ambient sketch, and “Franklin’s Theme” wraps its hi-hat rhythms with a coppery and noxious monotone. “Reveal (Pacific Coast Highway 1 Version)” is strikingly reminiscent of the Cure’s “Carnage Visors,” the soundtrack to a film the band opened their concerts with on 1981’s Picture tour.That song, reissued on the expanded edition of Faith, stretched a single riff into a 28-minute dirge, and Young Male’s short, funereal album—itself just 28 minutes long—functions in similar ways. Almost claustrophobic in its cohesion, it sounds like it was made using only a handful of obsolete machines, and the manner in which it worries away at the same few sounds and themes suggests a certain weary fatalism, a sense of running out of options. In Young Male’s America, all roads are dead ends.Los Angeles songwriter Alex Izenberg describes his debut album as the culmination of five years of writing and recording, which is a long time for a record that feels like the product of a few casual studio sessions. A modernist spin on the ’70s singer-songwriter album, grounded in the same evergreen themes of longing and heartache, Harlequin often seems torn between its ambition and its nonchalance. At times Izenberg shows flashes of Van Dyke Parks’ compositional bravado, but just as often he handicaps himself with Dollar Store chamber-pop accompaniments. He can’t commit to going big, but he doesn’t want to go too small, either.  Mostly, it seems, Harlequin just wants to sound different, and on that front it succeeds. Following in the freak-folk tradition, it never goes too long without an idiosyncrasy: train horns, found sounds, long pauses, blank spaces, and other apparent studio mistakes that are almost certainly more deliberate than they pretend to be. The tropes themselves aren’t especially new, but the way they’re all shuffled together is, and Izenberg is confident enough in the originality of his final product that he directly credits his influences. Instead of downplaying his debt to Grizzly Bear on waltzier pieces like “Archer” and “Changes,” Izenberg leans into it, adopting Daniel Rossen’s top hat-doffing swoon as a kind of homage.  Elsewhere, Lou Reed gets a nod on the choppy cabaret number “To Move on” when Izenberg borrows his “Rock & Roll” phrasing to describe dancing to that “fine, fine music,” although it’s Reed’s Velvet Underground bandmate John Cale who looms even larger over the record. Austere violas and cellos lend an undercurrent of doom to a series of stormy, impressionistic pieces like “Libra” and “The Farm,” which tease the full-scale orchestral album Izenberg might have made instead.  Listening to Harlequin, it’s hard not to wonder if the record would have been better off if Izenberg had gone all in on those arrangements, since the album always stops just short of genuinely wowing. Where Parks, Rossen, and Cage never disguise how much effort they’ve spent meticulously piecing their components into intricate works, Izenberg would rather give the appearance that he just poured a jigsaw puzzle box onto the table and accepted the patterns that formed. That approach sometimes scans as insecurity: Harlequin often feels like a pretentious album afraid of being called pretentious.   The record’s best numbers are those rare ones when the adornments take a back seat to the songs themselves. On the early highlight “Grace,” Izenberg laments losing himself in a misguided crush, and lands one of the better forehead-slap lyrics this side of Rivers Cuomo’s “I’m dumb, she’s a lesbian”: “Darkness had taken over me,” he sings, “Once I’d seen her engagement ring.” And on “Changes,” his struggles as both a romantic and a songwriter converge when he confesses, “It’s getting real hard to talk about her to anyone.” The album could use a few more moments like that, lines where Izenberg comes across like the kind of relatable guy you might want to trade tales of heartbreak with over a beer. Yet for a record so guarded, it’s almost always personable—even its most difficult songs, like the avant sound collage “A Bird Came Down,” have a gracious, likable quality (it helps that he keeps them short). Harlequin is an odd album with perplexing priorities and a conflicted sense of scale, but just enough sweetness and heart to make you want to give it the benefit of the doubt anyway.By now, the world knows who Donald Glover is. From “Community” to the sharp and universally beloved “Atlanta” to his forthcoming Star Wars role, he’s carved out his persona; he’s likable, sensitive, and observant, the self-aware everyman. But Childish Gambino has always been harder to pin down. Since emerging with throwaway mixtapes under that alias, Glover has released two highly self-reflexive rap full-lengths, a Southern rap EP and a straight pop EP, and hosted a mysterious, cell phone-free festival. The unifying thread connecting all of this has sometimes been hard to spot. His recently released “Awaken, My Love!” is his hardest left turn yet, ditching rap wholesale in favor of funk worship, and the result is his most enjoyable project to date. In paying homage to heroes, he even hits upon some of the genuine emotional connection that has often been missing from his music.The album’s production is majestic, aiming squarely for the cosmos depicted on its striking cover artwork. Like the cosmic soul it emulates, the atmosphere is lush, full of period ambiance worthy of a high-end television set. The album’s first track and lead single, “Me and Your Mama,” is a satisfying slow burn that shows off Glover’s impressive falsetto. Its imagery (“This is the end of us/Sleeping with the moon and the stars”) might be vapid, but the intensity of Glover’s singing compensates, as does the ripping electric guitar.The tracks are embellished with intricate details throughout, like the delicate xylophone on “Terrified.” “Redbone” builds from a slow jam into a peak of futuristic guitar and forceful staccato piano chords. It’s a love song, which has always been Glover’s forte, whether on Because the Internet’s “3005,” “Telegraph Ave,” or Camp’s “L.E.S.” The same goes for the open-hearted “Baby Boy,” possibly inspired by the birth of his son. These songs dig into something that feels unique to Glover’s heart, not just his record collection.Too much of the rest, though, simply nods to sentiment without producing any. On “Have Some Love,” he limply advises the audience to “really love one another.” The song called “Riot” isn’t exactly riotous: He screams a little, but only for the sake of fulfilling a pre-ordained funk yelp quota—nothing in the song seems to have moved him to shrieking. There are also a few indistinguishable tracks that feel like funk retreads; “Have Some Love” sounds uncomfortably close to “Can You Get to That” from Funkadelic’s Maggot Brain. “California,” a cringey tropical parody complete with fake patois, sticks out for the wrong reasons. It sounds like “Kokomo” for the “Hotline Bling” era, or maybe Ween covering Sublime’s “Caress Me Down,” and its inclusion is entirely baffling, considering the sonic cohesion of the rest of the project.Donald Glover’s greatest talents remain his tragicomic touch as a screenwriter and his ease with performance. He’s skilled enough to figure out how to excel at something, and, for the most part, look like he knows what he’s doing. As a rapper, he almost sounded the part: Take a step back, and there he was, rapping fast, switching up flows, delivering (too many) punchlines. But zoom in, and it didn’t really click. Rarely did he make a song about anything, and those zingers were plain obnoxious. (“Fandango my mandingo, we should do a movie” from a 2012 track with Danny Brown, for example.) That same on-paper ability is what makes “Awaken, My Love!” a well-executed project: He has clearly absorbed a great deal of musical history, as the album nods to Parliament-Funkadelic, Sly and the Family Stone, Rick James, Prince, and more. There are times, however, when that nodding feels more like mimicry than anything else. Maybe he’ll figure out how to smuggle Donald Glover’s heart into Childish Gambino’s brain eventually, but if he hasn’t figured out what he wants out of Childish Gambino yet, it’s increasingly rewarding watching him try. New Jersey rapper Fetty Wap reached complete cultural saturation with his surprise hit “Trap Queen,” a love story with a crack core that swept through suburbs and schoolyards all the same. Before long it was getting Vox explainers and an Ed Sheeran cover, and then Fetty was singing it on stage with Taylor Swift at stadiums. It charted in the Top 10 in Belgium and Denmark. His success ballooned enough that he started crossing milestones only held by megastar rappers like Lil Wayne and Eminem: Three songs charted in the Billboard Hot 100’s Top 10 and three in the Top 20. But a fourth single never caught hold, and soon he was making a mixtape with French Montana, Coke Zoo. This February, he received a few cursory Grammy nominations and his self-titled debut was finally certified platinum, but his visibility was waning. By August, he was guest starring on “Love & Hip Hop: Hollywood,” alongside Nicki Minaj’s spurned ex Safaree Samuels. Ubiquity can be a fleeting thing.It isn’t the most precipitous decline in rap history or even the most unusual rap career arc for a would-be star, but it would appear Fetty Wap is nearing a crossroads. What Fetty does next is crucial to whether or not he sustains his success, or just becomes the “Trap Queen” Guy. Though promising sales and streams for his debut appear to indicate a healthy base eager for a proper follow-up, it’s just as likely that the album was merely the beneficiary of the house of mirrors that is “album-equivalent units.” His latest release, Zoovier, is a 19-track sampler mixing his trap balladry with more traditional trap bangers. To avoid a Fetty Wap retread, there is significantly more rapping, which, unfortunately, produces more than his fair share of bars like “Bitch I’m Papa Smurf, I got my money right/Got a Super Soaker for her water ride.”But if you wade through some of the cringy lyrics (on “King Zoo”: “I put the molly in her shit hole/And watch it light up like a disco”), the straight-up boring ones, the more grating moments, and the lulls here or there provided by songs like “Bad Lil Bitch,” there’s a more compact offering that recalls his most invigorating uses of Auto-Tune and his most charming performances. A song like “Instant Friends,” with its harmony fills and subtle come-ons, is magnetic in its delicate use of social cues, yet it’s lined with DM-violating blunt talk. “Don’t Love Me” and “Hate You,” a pair of gummy synth delights, are perfect complements, in sound and subject. The only true ballad on the tape, “Shorty,” is a reimagining of Plies and T-Pain’s “Shawty” that is as much an exhibitions for the ad-libs as it is for his full-bodied croons.When it hits, Zoovier is a reminder of just how malleable Fetty Wap’s voice is, flipping from flirtatious to tender to outright lovestruck in a blink. But this is a bloated release that doesn't play to those strengths enough, and his boasts all start to run together after a while: exotic cars, exotic women, having sex with exotic women in exotic cars. It isn’t just that he’s a ball of rap cliches; it’s that he doesn’t make any of them seem fun. Fetty isn’t a very imaginative writer, and he relies primarily on feel, so it’s odd that he would intentionally tie one hand behind his back with so many melody-less raps.  Zoovier is further evidence that Fetty is best (and perhaps solely effective) as a trap romantic. Why ruin a good thing? If this tape is some kind of beta test for the Next Gen Fetty Wap, here’s hoping he opts to just stick to the formula that swept the nation.Miranda Lambert’s music has always existed in extremes. Throughout the Texan’s previous five albums, she has established herself as a no-nonsense country-pop troubadour whose response to emotional turmoil could be separated neatly into kerosene-fueled revenge fantasies and “American Idol”-ready torch ballads. Right from the start, however, it’s clear that The Weight of These Wings is a different type of album for Lambert. “I’m looking for a lighter, I already bought the cigarettes,” she sings in “Runnin’ Just in Case,” the album’s majestic opening track. It’s a subtle lyric, but it’s indicative of her change in perspective: to put it simply, finding the fire has never been the problem for Lambert. Alas, things have changed.Although it arrives in the wake of her high-profile divorce from Blake Shelton, The Weight of These Wings is a breakup album refreshingly devoid of spite or anger. Instead, it’s a thoughtful concept record, more focused on moving on and growing up than lashing out or telling all. Throughout its twenty-four songs, Lambert analyzes herself and her choices, often while on the road: It’s more Hejira than Blue, more “Shelter From the Storm” than “Idiot Wind.” The pensive tone of the lyrics is reflected in the album’s stark, unglamorous production. Despite coming from one of the highest-paid, most successful country artists on the planet, Wings makes precious few ploys for pop radio. There are no millennial whoops or 1989 synths. Instead, the album is distinguished by a rootsy stomp akin to Tom Petty’s Wildflowers—another long, post-divorce statement that used its sprawl to mimic the messy mental state of its creator.While Wings is a double album in the traditional sense (it’s a good seventeen minutes longer than Metallica’s recent one), it does away with the clutter usually associated with the form. The album’s most experimental track is also its most traditional—the pitch-perfect classic country of “To Learn Her”—and it’s most throwaway moment, an easily editable false start to the groovy “Bad Boy,” is charming and self-aware. The mood throughout the album is staggeringly consistent, and its separate halves (titled “The Nerve” and “The Heart,” respectively) feel like less a means of distinguishing their sounds than identifying their subtle shift in tone. While “The Nerve” finds Lambert losing herself in travel (“Highway Vagabond”), drinking (“Ugly Lights”), and a pair of cheap sunglasses (“Pink Sunglasses”), “The Heart” is less hell-bent on escape. In “Six Degrees of Separation,” Lambert flees to New York City only to be haunted by an ad for a litigation attorney, plastered across a bus stop bench. Such is the narrative of The Weight of These Wings: the landscape of America starts to resemble your mental geography the more closely you identify what you’re looking for.Even with the tremendous growth Lambert shows as a songwriter, she remains true to herself and her past work. The choruses still arrive precisely when you want them to. The references are cozily predictable (getting “on the road again” requires a Willie Nelson namedrop, naturally). “Kitchen sink” still rhymes with “diesel tank.” And Lambert maintains her trademark style of country-girl self-mythologizing in a way that feels both fresh and funny. In the boozy garage rock of “Ugly Lights,” she’s “the one who doesn’t need another one,” begrudgingly bumming smokes to folks younger and more sober than her. In “Vice,” one of at least five tracks on the album that feels like its show-stopping centerpiece, she leaves town simultaneously spitting in its face and winking at the camera: “If you need me/I’ll be where my reputation don’t precede me.” While Wings is hardly a showcase for any kind of vocal gymnastics, Lambert’s voice remains the star throughout. She can switch from a soulful vibrato in “To Learn Her” to a scratchy howl in “Pink Sunglasses” with equal confidence. She drawls with eerie detachment in the snappy “Highway Vagabond,” which sounds a little like “Send My Love (To Your New Lover),” if Adele was less interested in letting go of her ghosts and more in letting them ride shotgun. “Get off one and get on the other highway,” she sings in the chorus, “Well if we ain’t broke down then we ain’t doing something right.” It’s a sentiment that’s echoed in the album’s closing song “I’ve Got Wheels,” when Lambert’s endless driving sounds like self-empowerment: an excuse to move forward. Alone at the wheel, she sounds steady and weightless, like she finally knows where she’s going.“open wide.,” the first video from Denitia and Sene’s second full-length album, oscillates from oversaturated white daylight to bleary nighttime shots of the group. Shot by Brian Marc (Sene’s an alias) that filmic quality carries over to the Brooklyn duo’s music, which renders spare, low-lit R&B with its elements bleeding together or blurring just out of focus. Three years have passed since their debut introduced their fuzzed-out trip-hop/soul, and it wasn’t easy to sort what they were up to at the time. love and noir. continues along the future R&B template they introduced on His and Hers., more often than not favoring a simmering, slow-moving pulse that falls closer to the pace of a resting heartbeat than almost anything else on modern R&B radio.That deliberate pacing gives opener “favorite.” a gentle feel, weary but calmed, befitting the song’s theme, when the other half has returned from a long day’s work. Synth brass bubbles up and finger snaps accentuate the bass throb, as Denitia admits: “My favorite part of the day is when I see your face/I know it sounds cliché/But when I see your face/Everything’s okay.” But even though the lyrics acknowledge their own triteness, they don’t quite escape it. The album explores love, doubt, and the pins and needles in between, territory that R&B has traversed for decades. But despite delving into the shadows of love, the duo too often stretch their imagery to the breaking point. “strung.” twines a halting beat and deep bass wobble to a prickly guitar lick that get layered to the point where it approaches shoegaze-thick fuzz. A deft bit pizzicato strings blips up midway through, but listen to the lines about being “torn at the seam” and said strings belabor the metaphor running through the track, which asks: “Whose strings have you strung?”Denitia and Sene are adept when it comes to establishing a seductive mood for the length of a song, but over the course of this twelve-track album, it turns sluggish. “roulette.” warns “don’t try this at home” against a muffled kick that never rises above the haze and long stretches of the album feel lethargic. “open wide.” remains the highlight of the album, achieving a balance between ’80s anthemic balladry and ’00s R&B noisiness. Only as the album draws to a close do the slow tempos  gain traction and push forward the songs. “alone.” finds Denitia toggling between defiant and forlorn against a slippery breakbeat and pleading guitar. “How far can we go?” the duo harmonize on closer “too far.”, Denitia’s voice reaching a poignant note;. But just as the mood settles in, the beat fades away before the three-minute mark and casual chatter takes over, like a door opening from a darkened studio back into daylight. John Legend doesn’t waste time getting to the point of Darkness and Light, his fifth solo album. On “I Know Better,” the record’s gospel-infused opener, the singer refutes the celebrity he’s acquired to date: “Legend is just a name, I know better than to be so proud/I won’t drink in all this fame/Or take more love than I’m allowed.” At this stage of his career—which includes 10 Grammy awards, a Golden Globe, and an Academy Award for Best Original Song—Legend could’ve continued to play it safe; his mix of secular and spiritual soul has taken him far over the years. But on Darkness and Light, Legend pushes beyond his comfort zone for something a bit more ambitious. With its meditative and ingratiating songwriting, this is unmistakably a John Legend album, yet there’s a renewed sense of peace and even a sad wisdom that distinguishes it. He sings lovingly of his infant daughter, Luna, wondering who she will become as she grows older. He ponders the different sides of love, and the raw emotions they evoke. He's made a love record about navigating the bleak world and finding happiness in dark times.For Darkness and Light, Legend reached out to Blake Mills after hearing what the producer did for Alabama Shakes’ breakout LP, Sound & Color. In turn, Mills wanted to push Legend to the limits of his emotional range. “There was this hole in John’s material that I felt like a huge part of his personality could come through,” Mills recently told Billboard. “We’re still talking about ‘What’s Going On’ some 40 years later. Yes, ‘Sexual Healing’ is a great track. But when we think of Marvin Gaye, ‘What’s Going On’ is the song that comes up.” The implicit criticism there rings true: Legend has calling-card songs like “Ordinary People” and “All of Me,” yet by and large, he makes safe R&B that doesn’t resonate long-term or hit hard politically (he released a collaborative LP with the Roots in 2010, but those were covers of Curtis Mayfield, Nina Simone, and Bill Withers.)For Darkness and Light, Mills wanted to merge Legend’s artistic and political sides, bringing the opinionated guy we see on “Real Time With Bill Maher” to the forefront. We hear shades of this on “Penthouse Floor,” a standout featuring Chance the Rapper, even if the grooving track behind Legend still feels more sultry than angry as he wonders: “All this trouble in this here town/All this shit going down/When will they focus on this?/Streets fired up with the TV crews/Look, Ma, we on the news!/But they didn’t notice before this.” Conversely, on the Miguel-featured “Overload,” Legend reflects on his marriage to model Chrissy Teigen, running down the endless distractions posed by the shiny device in his hand as a metaphor for connection (“Let that cell phone ring/Let that blue bird sing/Let that message say ‘unread.’”) The album comes full circle near the end, on “How Can I Blame You,” in which Legend is pulled over for a traffic violation—but instead of a menacing encounter, or a meditation on the rash of police shootings of black men during traffic stops, Legend uses the moment as a metaphor for life’s rapid pace. He’s urged to slow down and appreciate what he has. In the end, Darkness and Light isn’t the political feat Mills and Legend had hoped for, but it’s a step forward in the singer’s evolution. He may never be a firebrand, but Legend proves there’s still strength in humility.Courting confusion is part of the job description for anyone working in the avant-garde. Some experimenters meet this requirement with the equivalent of a shrug, while others take to the task with more evident relish. For over half a century, the singer and visual artist Yoko Ono has found herself in the latter camp, gleefully scrawling her new approaches into the official ledgers of cultural production.  The editors of the recent volume Fluxbooks credit Ono’s 1964 Grapefruit as being “one of the first works of art in book form.” Ono’s early short films likewise helped expand cinematic practices. In the years before she started dating a Beatle, Ono sang with one of John Cage’s most trusted musical interpreters, and turned a New York loft space into a contemporary-art destination that drew the likes of Marcel Duchamp to her door.Yet this multimedia artist’s most notorious act of provocation was her approach to becoming tabloid fodder. She took one of the world’s most popular musicians and hurried along his engagement with the experimental fringe (an attraction already evident in John Lennon’s work, as early as 1966’s Revolver). In some quarters, she’s never been forgiven for this. But Ono’s radical influence on pop history has also inspired generations of visionary artists.The Lennon/Ono collaborative albums were a critical part of their take on celebrity coupledom. Their first two LPs carried the series title “Unfinished Music,” a conceptual gambit with deeper roots in the aesthetic of the Fluxus art movement than in that of the British Invasion. The first set to be issued, subtitled Two Virgins, was a sound-collage set reportedly produced during their first night together. The album’s name, and the full-frontal nudity of its cover, referenced the couple’s sense of innocence in approaching a new beginning—as well as the fact that the recording took place just prior to the consummation of their relationship.As the product of a first date, Two Virgins is fascinating. As a sound artifact from the initial decade of Fluxus-inspired activity, it has plenty of competition. Casual clips of the couple’s conversations—mixed in alongside Lennon’s tape loops—blur the distinction between the private and the public-facing. This approach recalls efforts by some of Ono’s contemporaries, like Charlotte Moorman and Benjamin Patterson. But what makes Two Virgins distinct is the range of Ono’s voice. In the opening moments, she contributes some pure-tone humming, which sounds downright companionable amid Lennon’s meandering keyboard motifs and reverb tape-effects. Four-and-a-half-minutes in, Ono unleashes the first of her extended yelps, from the top of her range. Even if you know it’s coming, this sound always registers as shocking.This aspect of Ono’s musicianship confused (and enraged) large portions of Lennon’s audience. Despite her purposeful variations of timbre and her ability to hit notes cleanly, Ono’s recourse to this proto-punk wail was often decried as unmusical. And after the White Album’s “Revolution 9”—a much tighter collage created by Lennon, Ono and George Harrison, now sometimes interpreted by classical musicians—she was often accused of being the driving agent behind the Beatles’ breakup. Tensions from Beatlemania carry over into the couple’s second, less idyllic “Unfinished Music” release, subtitled Life With the Lions. Corporate tussles between the Beatles and their record label provide some of the inspiration for “No Bed for Beatle John,” a piece recorded in Ono’s hospital room, following a miscarriage. The album’s dominant track, though, is the side-length workout “Cambridge 1969,” a live recording driven by Lennon’s guitar feedback and Ono’s harshest vocalizations.In failing to create much interest over its 26 minutes, “Cambridge 1969” reveals something important about Ono’s art. The performances of hers that work don’t do so merely because she can kick up a unique noise. Instead, the takes that have true liftoff usually find her switching up those extreme textures with greater frequency. Unlike some of the composers she hung out with, circa 1961, Ono is not a drone artist. She’s an expert in subtle variations, carved from blocks of seeming chaos.Her 1970 album Yoko Ono Plastic Ono Band is a triumph, in part, because it sounds fully aware of this reality. It’s also iconic because it contains some of Lennon’s most aggressive guitar work. Opener “Why” hurtles from its needle-drop opening, with slide guitar swoops and febrile picking that anticipate the variety of Ono’s vocal lines. When the singer enters, she wastes no time in applying a range of approaches to her one-word lyric sheet. Long expressions full of vibrato give way to shorter exhalations, rooted in the back of the throat. Spates of shredded laughter communicate the absurdist good humor that’s often present in Ono’s work. The minimalist pounding of drummer Ringo Starr and bassist Klaus Voormann is there as a foil, propped against all the invention on offer from Ono and Lennon.“Why Not” inverts this script by arranging similar licks inside a slower tempo. Ono’s voice becomes more pinched and childlike, while Lennon’s guitar lines have a bluesier profile. Elsewhere, Ono puts a new spin on an “instruction” piece from her Grapefruit book, with the echo-laden “Greenfield Morning I Pushed an Empty Baby Carriage All Over the City.” Here, in another surprise, Ono’s voice sounds stolid and more traditionally “correct.” That feel is subsequently obliterated by the noisy middle section of “AOS,” a track Ono recorded in ’68 with saxophonist Ornette Coleman’s band. The Lennon-led backing group returns for the final two pieces of the original LP configuration, which have a comparatively calmer air. Like Lennon’s ’70 solo album of the same name (and near-identical cover), Ono’s Plastic Ono Band initially scans as acerbic, yet manages to create a supple variety of song-forms from that opening template. Ono’s absorption of her new husband’s sonic language was only beginning to pay dividends, too. As Sean Lennon’s Chimera imprint and the Secretly Canadian label continue to reissue her catalog, Ono’s subsequent experiments with rock and pop formats will come into clearer view for audiences that have only heard rumors about her craft. Still, these opening reissues—which come complete with era-appropriate B-sides and outtakes—all manage to reflect a key aspect of Ono’s broader artistic intentions, as defined in a 1971 artist’s statement: “I like to fight the establishment by using methods that are so far removed from establishment-type thinking that the establishment doesn’t know how to fight back.”“Deejays predate the internet, in a way,” Coldcut’s Jonathan More told the Chicago Tribune in 1997. “We’re filters who select information from different sources and give it a context for people to grab on to.” That probably made a certain amount of sense then, right on the cusp of the dot-com boom, but compared to everything that happened next—MP3 downloads, P2P networks, YouTube, Spotify—the idea of a DJ as a crucial node in a global information network sounds as antiquated as a tin-can-and-string toy telephone. And so, in its own quaint way, does Coldcut’s debut single, “Say Kids What Time Is It?,” which will celebrate its 30th anniversary in February. A cut-and-paste hip-hop jam inspired by Steinski’s turntable collages, the tune sampled a mess of funk and disco breaks along with snippets of The Jungle Book and the theme to the 1950s television show “Howdy Doody”—a show that, when Coldcut recorded the song, was roughly as distant in time as their debut single is from us today.Coldcut have always had a McCluhan-esque fascination with the collision of form and content. That was the driving impulse behind those early experiments in turntablism and sampling, which mimicked the distracted zapping encouraged by cable television and remote controls. But as the flow of information has sped up, Coldcut have struggled to articulate a compelling framework for their own productions, even as their label, Ninja Tune, has asserted itself as a leading force in beat-oriented electronic music. Their last album, 2006’s Sound Mirrors, brought together dancehall beats and acid house with spoken word from Saul Williams, snippets of the poet Amiri Baraka’s voice, and tag-team sloganeering from Jon Spencer and Mike Ladd—an eclectic assemblage that couldn’t quite decide where it wanted to go or what it wanted to be.This new EP, their first release in a decade, looks at first like an attempt to engage with our own critical media moment, in which “message” is smothered by a deluge of disinformation. The record cover strikingly juggles elements of mid-20th-century Polish poster design, the staticky “snow” of a dead television screen, and the scrambled logo of the Daily Mail, a right-wing populist tabloid in the UK; press materials present the record as “an exercise in ‘dissentertainment’.” But nothing in the EP’s five tracks measures up to that rhetoric. Mostly, it serves as a vehicle for the London rapper Roots Manuva and the singer Roses Gabor, although their contributions sound like they were meant for two entirely different records. On lead track “Only Heaven,” Roots Manuva rattles off stream-of-consciousness assonant rhymes (“Molotov quality/Causing controversy/Oh, it’s so odd to see/Oh, it’s so novelty”) that sound great—he’s such a personable vocalist, he could make the phone book sound catchy—but don’t add up to much. On the chorus, a sighing Roses Gabor offers platitudes: “Only heaven can ever save me/Feels like hell out on these streets/I need you more than you need me.” Like worn Velcro, the two halves fail to stick together, and the backing track, a twinkling approximation of early Portishead, doesn’t make up for what’s missing lyrically; the same goes for the closing “Quality Control,” a woozy dub version of the title cut.The languid “Dreamboats” is more interesting musically, particularly in a narcotic breakdown that loops Gabor’s voice against clanking chains and ethereal coos. But again, Roots Manuva’s third-eye mindstates and Gabor’s vaguely erotic hook  fail to complement each other in any meaningful way. “Creative,” meanwhile, might as well be Coldcut’s homage to Disclosure’s brand of garage-influenced house—which is ironic, given the song’s anti-biter vocal hook, which they’ve sampled from a 1989 single by the South London rapper Black Radical MKII. More charitably, you could compare its swirls of layered synths to Four Tet, but that’s not enough to make it sound particularly vital.Musically, the most interesting thing here is “Donald’s Wig,” a rolling drum’n’bass tune featuring Gabor solo. Unfortunately, it flies the furthest from the mark they’ve set for themselves with the “dissentertainment” tag. Perhaps the topic seemed like a good idea at the time, when they went into the studio; from afar—across the Atlantic, and, crucially, months before the U.S. presidential election of November 2016—a tongue-in-cheek song about Donald Trump must have appeared a fairly low-stakes affair. It is precisely the kind of absurdist, media-savvy, vaguely political thing that Coldcut have always delighted in. But the song fails to engage with its subject matter in any meaningful way beyond the title, even though the press release explicitly references the then-candidate, now president-elect. The hook—“Don’t give up your race/Days are going to wait”—was presumably meant in the context of the electoral race, but as the specter of white nationalism looms ever larger over Trump’s cabinet and rabid fan base, the line comes to seem unfortunately vague at best. Post-election and, for the UK, post-Brexit, we’re well aware of all the ways the media has failed us. Rather than providing a superficial media critique, Coldcut would be better off taking a page from their own book and returning to the righteous anger that fueled their 2002 remix with Saul Williams, “Not in My Name.”In their respective careers, singer-songwriter Joan Wasser (AKA Joan as Police Woman) and multi-instrumentalist Benjamin Lazar Davis have both flirted with pop accessibility while also keeping their distance. Of the two, Wasser has hewed closer to traditional pop forms, while Davis has taken a more academic approach with the chamber pop outfit Cuddle Magic. But on their first collaboration Let It Be You, Wasser and Davis indulge themselves, revealing a shared sweet tooth for bubblegum bombast that will likely shock each of their fanbases. Aside from her work with Anohni, Rufus Wainwright, and Lou Reed, Wasser’s solo output repeatedly demonstrates her natural affinity for songcraft. In particular, she’s shown a knack for borrowing from mainstream pop music in a way that preserves its dignity. Her heavily soul-inflected work, arty as it may be, reminds us of a time when pop tunes wound up in jazz clubs without losing anything in translation. Unlike so many of her peers, Wasser never comes off like she's slumming, instead working deftly at the porous border between whatever separates “highbrow” and “popular” art.Meanwhile, Davis—who has a much more playful, high-energy presence—brings an explosive spark to the material. Where Wasser's bittersweet chords on piano and guitar reflect the full, often messy range of everyday feelings, Davis tends to lean towards more childlike expressions. One would expect these differences to create fertile ground on an album that addresses relationships so much. But the pair undercuts the human element of the music by play-acting at singing big and bold for the people way up in the cheap seats. On the aptly named “Overloaded,” the chorus scrapes the adult-contempo stratosphere by mimicking the familiar production style of huge-budget R&B-inflected pop music. Here and elsewhere, Davis and Wasser play off of one another, egging each other on to dial up the schmaltz and clearly having fun in the process. They sound positively giddy, but the results almost completely sideline the moodiness that drives the spirit of both Cuddle Magic and Joan As Policewoman.Case in point: the Let It Be You version of “Overloaded” oozes with outsized melodrama—you’d believe it if someone told you it had been written with Katy Perry in mind. Cuddle Magic’s rendition, on the other hand, hits more subtle notes by enticing you to read between the lines. On Let It Be You, the song becomes somewhat faceless, one of several love songs that wear heartbreak like a neon-colored stage costume. And generic turns of phrase like “It hurts so bad how much I love you/Makes me wanna die when I'm thinkin’ of you” (from “Hurts So Bad”) make it hard to tell whether Wasser and Davis are mocking or celebrating the pop vocabulary they’re employing.Sonically speaking, Let It Be You is undeniably rich, and there are moments where Wasser and Davis weave around each other like seasoned dance partners. The title track, for example, starts with a bit-crushed melody line and handclap samples that reference the Central African Republic Pygmy rhythms that initially brought the pair together. At first, Wasser faux-rhymes in a flat-pitched, finger-wagging tone like she's doing her best Luscious Jackson impersonation. But when she and Davis harmonize together on the chorus, the song soars to a more sublime place—where most of this album should aim.Let It Be You shows what it could have been on the final track, the ultra-solemn “Station,” which starts with Wasser singing accompanied only by watery electric guitar for several verses. The funereal vibe is so jarring—and convincingly heartrending—that at first it sounds as if a Joan As Policewoman tune ended up on the wrong record. Perhaps “Station” would have been better served set aside for one of Wasser’s own albums. Here, it feels like a glimpse of foregone possibility on a lower-stakes project, the sound of two pros blowing off steam by proving they can recreate Top 40 spectacle. It might be a good time, but good times aren’t what got Joan Wasser and Benjamin Lazar Davis where they are. At the turn of the century, emo had finally gone pop, but hadn’t felt like music for popular kids. On Clear Channel playlists, “The Middle” and “Screaming Infidelities” were boyish, bashful contrast to the goateed bullies of nu-grunge and rap-metal and the New Rock Revival’s trouser-stuffing sexuality. But while Jimmy Eat World and Dashboard Confessional were extensions of the church basement and DIY house scenes that fostered Christie Front Drive, the Get Up Kids, and the Promise Ring, they would soon be overtaken by the likes of Brand New, Taking Back Sunday, and plenty of bands who were basically jocks in ringer T’s: they were loud, rude, and thought about little other than sex. The Long Island band’s 2001 debut Your Favorite Weapon helped establish the sound and the gender politics for a time when emo would draw in more fans of both sexes than ever before, but often cleared the room of people who expected punk rock to be a welcoming or progressive environment. To this day, “Emo Night” most likely means drunken 20-somethings yelling along with “Jude Law and a Semester Abroad.”After the potent but obnoxious venting of Your Favorite Weapon, Brand New’s ambitions started to emerge two years later on Deja Entendu—they hired a guy who engineered Pixies records to produce it, wrote the acoustic weeper “The Boy Who Blocked His Own Shot” to prove they’d heard the Smiths, and added a guitar solo on “Good to Know That if I Ever Need Attention All I Have to Do is Die” that veered so close to “Hotel California” it proved they’d probably never heard the Eagles. But frontman Jesse Lacey still inhabited a stunted, vindictive emotional viewpoint—even as he spent considerable time staring at an empty bottle, ruefully recounting the failure of copious sex and substances to provide him with any lasting happiness, he was just as quick to boast about a lifestyle that let him basically fuck and drink however much he wanted: “I wouldn’t stop if I could/Oh it hurts to be this good,” he admitted on “Okay I Believe You, But My Tommy Gun Don’t.” His flexing and his self-loathing were both forms of the same narcissism: In this way, he was almost proto-Drake.Brand New jumped from Triple Crown to Interscope after Deja Entendu, and no one would’ve been surprised if major-label money and expectations would’ve caused Lacey to go even deeper into his vices. But based on the ensuing Fight Off Your Demons demos, Lacey was at least willing to make an effort to be the better man. “Brother’s Song” and “1996” were worldly and warm, allowing someone else’s story to be told for once. But this embryonic version of Brand New’s third album was leaked by overzealous fans (and sold back to them a decade later), causing a disillusioned and emotionally violated Lacey to retreat inward again. By the time The Devil and God Are Raging Inside Me was completed, he may have realized that the world didn’t revolve around him—but he was now the dark center of the universe, a howling spiritual void.  Theology had always played an under-appreciated role in emo’s development. In fact, the golden era of emo was often praise music: witness the effect of Jeremy Enigk’s born-again Christianity on How It Feels to Be Something On, the exaltation of Mineral’s “Gloria,” or the existence of overtly denominational labels like Tooth & Nail. Even skeptics like David Bazan and Aaron Weiss could still quote scripture through their struggles. Besides, the mid-2000’s was a time when rock music of many stripes reasserted its faith: 2004 alone gave us Pedro the Lion’s Achilles Heel and mewithoutYou’s Catch for Us the Foxes, as well as the proudly Mormon Brandon Flowers, “Jesus Walks,” and Seven Swans. But while emo had previously been defined by passionate vocalists, desperately pleading to the heavens for salvation, Lacey was telling Jesus Christ not to bother— “I’m scared I’ll get scared and I swear I’ll try to nail you back up.”It’s teen angst blown up to literally biblical proportions, resonating like no emo band before or since to outcasts in Sunday school and high school. But as sure as Brand New is an emo band, The Devil and God Are Raging Inside Me is not an emo record. It might actually be post-emo: “Was losing all my friends, was losing them to drinking and to driving,” Lacey mutters with unsettling resignation on the album’s first lyric. He sounds no more relieved to say in the next line, “Was losing all my friends, but I got ‘em back.” Whereas Lacey once took great pride in his ability to turn even the smallest slights into voluble LiveJournal status updates (“my tongue’s the only muscle in my body that works harder than my heart”), The Devil and God is often a dispassionate eulogy for that version of himself and his silly little feelings: “I used to be such a burning example,” “I used to care I was being careful,” “goodbye to love.”  To some degree, The Devil and God Are Raging Inside Me can be classified as soulless—albeit “soulless” as an aesthetically powerful narrative choice. Positive reviews of The Devil and God Are Raging Inside Me likened Brand New to Radiohead and Modest Mouse—“Limousine (MS Rebridge)” is loosely modeled after “Exit Music (For a Film),” but Radiohead comparisons often serve as generic shorthand for “ambitious, brooding alternative rock.” The latter reference presumably referred to the band’s newfound affinity for whammy-bar harmonics and The Moon & Antarctica’s permafrost ambience, particularly on “Jesus.” In fact, the band had originally started working with Dennis Herring, who produced Modest Mouse’s Good News For People Who Love Bad News, an unexpected commercial success that put them in a position to share a co-headlining bill with Brand New this past year. But Lacey is soulless in a way that recalls Thom Yorke on Kid A and Isaac Brock on The Moon & Antarctica—these are narrators who have lost something substantial, who have been separated from their physical being and seem to be staring down at a Sim-version of themselves. “I’m not here, this isn’t happening,” Yorke moaned, while Brock asked, “Does anybody know a way for a body to get away?” A seriously unnerving performance of “Jesus” on “Late Night with David Letterman” presents Lacey as a spiritual husk, and there are Easter egg references to the cover art of Deja Entendu as an avatar for his former self: “this bedwetting cosmonaut,” “space cadet, pull out.” The Devil and God even sounds soulless. Despite being on Interscope’s dime, the band ran out of time and money while working with Herring and switched to “fifth member” Mike Sapone, responsible for the functional, nondescript mainstreamo sound of Your Favorite Weapon. And yet the same cold, clinical production is responsible for The Devil and God’s unusual and appropriate atmosphere. At no point does Lacey sound suicidal —in fact, he sounds resigned to living (“Do you feel condemned just being there?”). While The Devil and God touches on Nirvana, Joy Division, and Elliott Smith, it doesn’t attempt to conjure those artists’ specific psychosomatic distresses, whether through dyspeptic churn, epileptic terror, or catatonic depression. Lacey begs for divine retribution, and some of the most bludgeoning dynamics you’ll hear on a modern rock record deliver it. The added percussion on “Millstone” conveys metal-on-bone trauma, while instrumental “Welcome to Bangkok” could pass for an interstitial from The Seer. But The Devil and God is defined by its crippling “drops”—the chorus on “Sowing Season (Yeah)” plays on textbook Pixies-style explosiveness, but the full-band crashes on “Limousine,” “You Won’t Know,” and especially “Luca” are completely unexpected, the kind that cause convulsions at your desk or a swerve off the road. There isn’t a single warm or welcoming texture, just expanses of dulled existence and the brutal punishment Lacey so vehemently feels he deserves. But what exactly has he done? On Deja Entendu’s shockingly callous “Me vs. Maradona vs. Elvis” (Brand New’s own “Marvins Room”), Lacey coldly copped to his “desperate desires and unadmirable plans” but gave himself an out by presenting it all as a hypothetical (“if you let me have my way, I swear I’d tear you apart”). He wasn't the only guy in this realm passing off non-apologetic psychosexual reckoning as introspection at the time. This mode of songwriting often made for compelling gossip, but limited Brand New’s scope to things that actually happened to Jesse Lacey. Freed from the constraints of autobiography, The Devil and God Are Raging Inside Me allows Brand New to inhabit far more frightening mindsets, both real and fictional; similar to Sufjan Stevens’ “John Wayne Gacy Jr.,” a murderer’s heinous actions become a philosophical exercise, daring the listener to really consider whether they can empathize and see their own worst impulses made real. “Luca” takes its name from Vito Corleone’s most barbaric consigliere, one who impregnated an Irish prostitute, murdered her, and then strongarmed the midwife into burning a child in a furnace. On “Limousine (MS Rebridge)” and “You Won’t Know,” Lacey invokes the appalling death of 7-year old Katie Flynn, killed by a man driving the wrong way down Meadowbrook Parkway in Long Island with a .28 BAC, hours after being a flower girl at her aunt’s wedding. As alluded to in “Sowing Season,” too many of Lacey’s friends, and perhaps himself included, could have been Martin Heidgen, the man behind the wheel, and The Devil and God Are Raging Inside Me hinges on the conclusion that the willingness to sin is equal to actual sin if you’re subject to judgment from an omnipotent being. Lacey’s verse from the perspective of Heidgen ends as a half-assed plea for mercy from an unsalvageable human being who knows exactly what he is: “I saw our sad messiah/He was bored and tired of my laments/Said, ‘I’d die for you one time but never again’,” Lacey sings, drawing the parallel between Heidgen’s earthly verdict and the one Lacey expects when he meets his maker. The Devil and God Are Raging Inside Me rarely admits to much, diametrically opposed to melodramatic oversharing and tabloid exploits of Fall Out Boy, Panic! At the Disco, and My Chemical Romance that defined emo in the MySpace era. This was all very risky in 2006, especially for a band making its major label debut. Though critically acclaimed, the less enthusiastic reviews balked at the portentous epics and wished for more of the scorched-sugar rush of Deja Entendu. It’s not unwarranted; underwritten lyrics occasionally cut against the sober sonics (“Life is a test and I get bad marks”), and there’s just enough radio-friendly spite to remind the listener of the sound Brand New had grown out of. “Not the Sun” strains to extrapolate sexual denial into hellish spiritual immolation, while the broadly political and triumphant “The Archers Bows Have Broken” is an awkward fit within the otherwise insular and defeatist The Devil and God, especially as it leads into the nihilistic despondence of closer “Handcuffs.” Neither of those immediately accessible tracks were released as singles. Preliminary interviews were scarce and often with obscure, non-American publications (“in the States, you get misrepresented...the headline would end up being something stupid like ‘We hate My Chemical Romance,’” Lacey complained). Given a late-November release date unusual for non-marquee acts, The Devil and God peaked at #31 on Billboard, neither a flop nor a resounding success. Ten years ago today, Brand New were supporting The Devil and God Are Raging Inside Me on the road with Dashboard Confessional. Starting next week, they’ll be playing 15,000-cap arenas in the UK. The explanation isn’t simply, “they made The Devil and God Are Raging Inside Me.” Its effect on Brand New itself feels difficult to quantify and certainly not immediate: while 2009’s Daisy debuted in the top ten, it fell out after six weeks with little impact, its reception amongst critics and Brand New fans decidedly mixed. Though it’s not Brand New’s worst album, it’s certainly the one the least number of Brand New fans would say is their best. But their status as one of the most popular cult bands is more attributable to what they didn’t do after Daisy. Some of the presumed trolling behind Brand New’s current mythology might just be due to administrative errors or a desire to tie up loose ends before their maybe, maybe-not 2018 breakup: the liner notes for The Devil and God contained no lyrics, but an invitation to send one dollar for a booklet. Nine years later, fans were finally receiving them. And while their peers became overexposed or uninspired, Brand New’s continued insistence to let their fans speak for them created one of the loudest echo chambers going—“The Complete Guide to Brand New’s Comeback Album,” “Tunnelling Down the Brand New Wormhole,” “Brand New Came Up With a New Way to Mess With You Today,” “Brand New Just F*cking With Us at This Point,” this is all substantial Brand New LP5 reportage. By leaving his words and intentions open to interpretation, Lacey unwittingly shifted from a minor celebrity to a generational voice. For the most part, Brand New played the role of a principled, popular rock act that felt very uncomfortable with their position as spokespeople. There hasn’t been one like this in a very, very long time. The marginalization of rock music in the 21st century actually benefits a band like Brand New, as it pushes together potentially incompatible subsets of listeners. These days, Brand New have enough clout to play shows with their heroes in Built to Spill and Modest Mouse, but in 2006, most of their attempts to place themselves within a counterculture lineage somehow went unnoticed: the cover art for the “Jesus” single is a blatant homage to Jesus Lizard’s Goat, the title of The Devil and God Are Raging Inside Me is an obscure reference to Daniel Johnston. And when Brand New really tried to make their own answer to In Utero with Daisy, Lacey was namedropping Fugazi, Polvo and Archers of Loaf as formative influences.But Vinnie Accardi, the guitarist who co-wrote most of Daisy, mentioned Stone Temple Pilots’ Core and Alice in Chains’ Jar of Flies as his touchstones. And Brand New’s ability to hit the cheap seats—the first two choruses on Devil and God are “yeah” and “whoa”—make their discomfort and recalcitrance with their heralded status compelling rather than a matter of fact. At a point where most rock acts are going out of their way to ingratiate themselves with their audience and reach across aisles, Lacey screams  “I am not your friend, I’m not your lover, I’m not your family,” and it’s weirdly comforting to affirm him, with a blood-curdling YEAH. Brand New died for emo one time, but never again.How do you pin down Sun Ra? The cosmic jazzman laid down so much music it would take a warehouse of full-time historians working round-the-clock hours to figure it all out. Albums were often hastily assembled from his prolific sessions, packaged with DIY artwork and sold at gigs for quick cash. Thousands of hours of unheard recordings are rumored to exist. Maybe he stacked boxes of magnetic tape on far-away planets too, such was his connection to the stars.If it’s even possible to traverse the vast Sun Ra universe on board a single starship, then Strut Records’ new compilation Singles: The Definitive 45s Collection offers a compellingly sturdy vessel.  It’s a 65-track set of 7-inch fragments of the celestial god, sent to earth to help us map out details of his galaxy that the albums could not. There are no wasted motions here: Each flat, wax disc represented another bright star in the constellation Ra. The name of his birth certificate read Herman Poole Blount. Born in Alabama in 1914, the mysterious musician showed up in Chicago in 1946 with little more to his name than a jail record picked up for refusing to fight in World War II for ethical reasons. The jazz scene was primed for revolution and Blount moved to a different beat, driven by a journey to Saturn he claimed he made years earlier while in deep spiritual concentration.The star man would later take up the name Sun Ra, form his ever-changing band the Arkestra, and spend a lifetime teaching the world Afrofuturism, a complex ideology of Black nationalism, Egyptian myth, scientific discovery, science fiction movies and the other-worldly fashion choices he’d flaunt on-stage. Forget “Disco 2000”; Sun Ra was envisioning to the paranoid blips and beeps of “Disco 2021” some 30 years before Pulp showed up. He mastered the electro squiggles of “Planet Rock” prior to the birth of hip-hop, and forged his own form of analogue cyberpunk as Philip K. Dick sat as his typewriter laying out his own dark vision of the future. Singles preserves all that for future generations.It’s said when you watch classic movies like Citizen Kane today, it’s important to bare in mind that these movies were writing the rules of filmmaking that we now take for granted. Sun Ra’s music somehow doesn’t require that kind of explanation. As soon as the needle drops, it sounds like scripture—a key testament that formed a building block of a half-century of music. Everyone from George Clinton to OutKast read from The Book of Ra. And yet, on paper the project seems an odd prospect. Sun Ra was a lot of things—pianist, bluesman, bandleader, arranger, interstellar poet, multiverse traveller—but he’s never been accused of being a singles artist. Because of the format, Singles eschews his lengthier wigouts for shorter vignettes. You might not get the 20-minute avant-garde virtuosity of “Space Is the Place,” but you do get jaunty holiday jingle “It’s Christmas Time.” That might seem less crucial, but when grappling with Ra’s slippery legacy, nothing here feels disposable.For the fanatics, Singles will offer little they’ve not heard before. While the original 45 versions of a lot of these songs, many of which were released on Ra’s own El Saturn Records, are rare (or, in some cases, completely lost), they’ve all cropped up in other places, including a similar-but-less-expansive compilation put out by Evidence Records in 1996. Still, there’s undoubted power in hearing Ra’s career laid out like this.Arranged chronologically (or as close to it as possible—Ra wasn’t exactly pedantic when it came to labeling his sessions) and with about half the songs recorded during his 1950s Chicago period, Singles captures the genesis of his forward-thinking space-bop. Fittingly, the opening two tracks, “I Am an Instrument” and “I Am Strange,” both spoken-word numbers, predict his metaphysical interests. “I belong to one who is more than a musician/He is an artist,” he says on the former. His voice is tuned low and grave, as though foreshadowing a seismic event.Whether he’s envisioning a playful, pamphlet-utopian version of the city on the Lieber-Stoller-esque “Chicago USA” or mixing experimental rhythms with dense and fractured chants on “Spaceship Lullaby” (both recorded with the Nu Sounds, an important precursor to the Arkestra), it’s thrilling to hear Ra connect Chicago’s timeless jazz scene to his increasingly wild tinkerings. Even the earliest material on Singles is the sound of a bandleader confidently wielding his arsenal for maximum purpose.It’s not just Ra that gets shine. Singles captures The Arkestra at their finest. John Gilmore, a chief lieutenant in the group for almost 40 years, blusters with his tenor saxophone on the peppy “Soft Talk,” recorded in his first few years alongside Ra. The gentle horn riff of “Space Loneliness”—from 1960, Ra’s final year in Chicago—pulls you towards the void of the outer cosmos before blissful and delicate solos from Phil Cohran (cornet) and Marshall Allen (alto sax) chime in. Given the nature of the format, Singles also showcases Ra’s pop instincts. Whether it’s the smooth doo-wop of “Daddy’s Gonna Tell You Know Lie” (of which there are two versions), the wild-man energy of singer Yochanan on blistering R&B number “Hot Skillet Momma,” or Hattie Randolph’s sweet rendition of jazz standard “Round Midnight,” it’s a thrill to hear Ra carve out lean jukebox jams. On “Bye Bye,” the sweet harmonies of the Cosmic Rays are drowned out by short, sharp skewering of double bass that tears through the final few seconds. Recorded a decade before George Martin was doing that sort of thing, it confirms that even in the pop realm, Ra was a daring futurist.The later work sees Ra fully exploring the outer realms of his own talent. “Disco 2021” sounds like an android’s fever dream. A doomed but dinky organ holds hands with a Gilmore-led wind quartet on the ugly-beautiful “Outer Space Plateau.” Ra incorporates a Moog synth into “The Perfect Man”; probably recorded in mid-1973, he deploys a bluesy horn riff as the bedrock before running wild with the synthetic instrument. It’s a strange mismatch, but “The Perfect Man” feels like a rare link between dapper nightclub blues and the space-bound sounds of new wave, disco and early hip-hop. The song encapsulates Sun Ra’s freewheeling, alien brilliance. The London-based Strut Records has long been prolific in unearthing and reissuing old music and has gotten pretty damn good at it. The three-disc CD and LP releases of Singles: The Definitive 45s Collection includes a lot of the trimmings you might expect: rare photos, artwork, sleeve notes and an interview with El Saturn Records founder Alton Abraham. There’s also detailed track-by-track and session notes by project compiler Paul Griffiths that you’ll open up a lot as you grapple with this set. Strut is experienced in dusting off old recordings, so the remasters sound crisp—particularly when played back-to-back with versions that cropped up on other compilations—but without suffocating that rich 45rpm flavor. In addition to the CD and digital releases, Strut is putting out 20 cuts from the collection in two 45s box sets (Volume 1 released this month, Volume 2 released in March 2017) in a limited 500 copies run for the dedicated looking to fully immerse in the spirit of their original releases. For newcomers here for spiritual guidance, broaching Sun Ra’s seismic life work can be daunting. To penetrate the outer atmosphere and splash down into an unknown world; to crawl into a mind of a man with the power to transport his consciousness across our solar system. Singles offers a wide-ranging but accessible route to his unearthly sounds.Though firmly rooted in ’70s progressive and psychedelic rock, Dungen has never felt like a tribute act, throwback or genre exercise. By offering up honest-to-god great songs with memorable vocals leads, fluid performances, killer arrangements and an unflinching love of the flute, they nail the vibe of their beloved era while always sounding like themselves. On Häxan, the group presents a recent scoring of the 1926 animation classic The Adventures of Prince Achmed, replacing the original’s crackling symphonic score with fourteen interludes, rave-ups and mini-suites that nod knowingly to the past while remaining fresh. Like most soundtracks, Häxan comes alive in context. Though marketed as a stand-alone album, it reads more as a deep psych mood board than a truly independent work. There’s an abundance of production details to get lost in, and the band sounds as vital as ever—dynamic, tight and assured. The fuzzy guitar and scraped piano strings on the title track give the feel of a genuine Morricone relic, and the gorgeous organ on “Kalifen” nods overtly to “A Whiter Shade of Pale” without feeling cheap. Recorded to and edited on tape, there’s an exquisite warmth to the entire album, with plenty of chunky, vibrant textures. Tiny details, like the trail of a spring reverb or a strikingly loud shaker panned way off in the stereo field give a sense of raw physicality, of players reacting to one another in a room.One of the best moments comes early on, in “Wak-Wak’s Portar.” Sounding like a live bootleg from 1976, the group blurs into a monolithic, phased out wall of sound… except for the flute. Loud and in charge, it cuts across the whole mix, demanding to be heard. It’s an awesome, and funny, minute and a half, which suddenly gives way to some distant elevator music. Dungen are clearly enjoying themselves.Once the album is finished, however, the songs stay with you less than these details. To start, at 40 minutes it’s barely more than half the length of Adventures, which means you can’t toss it on alongside the film and have a seamless experience start-to-finish.  Nonetheless, letting the two play simultaneously does have its rewards. Album opener “Peri Banu Vid Sjön” initially sounded like a bland bit of coffee shop fodder. But next to the opening credits, it bloomed, teasing out a melancholy ache behind the tale of adventure about to unfold.At times, there were moments of startling synchronicity. More importantly, the moods simply matched up often. Dungen’s rollicking, questing rhythm section and flight-of-fancy solos sync up well with the flying horses, shapeshifting spell casters and voyages to faraway lands, and the more eerie, spaced out passages worked great in tenser scenes. Still, an edit that we could match to the film would have been a more-than-welcome addition. As it is, Häxan occupies an odd slot in Dungen’s hard hitting and respectably consistent discography: a labor of love that is less than essential, rewarding but not attention grabbing, remarkably ambitious and yet strangely ephemeral. Though her soundtrack for Jonathan Glazer’s 2014 feature Under the Skin was more prominently received, Mica Levi’s tape Feeling Romantic Feeling Tropical Feeling Ill felt like her landmark release that year. The hour-long mix, with colorful, droning chapters bleeding seamlessly into one another, broke from the brash pop of her band Micachu & the Shapes, offering instead an elastic take on avant-garde composition. Loose and weird, it stomped and crackled all over the place, brimming with an impulsive sense of personality.On this new collaboration with cellist and producer Oliver Coates, who also performed on the Under the Skin OST, Levi loops back to that unstructured sound. (Accordingly, Remain Calm has origins in a live collaboration for NTS Radio, also in 2014.) But she builds it up, too, by decluttering and introducing a more orchestral sensibility. With her songwriting for Micachu & the Shapes or her soundtracks, one gets the sense that Levi is sinking herself into a style, a set of constraints, conditions reflected in those projects’ concision. Here, as with Feeling Romantic, the field is wide open, and the results are imaginative and multi-textured.In form, these 13 tracks, most under three minutes long, resemble sketches. This is not at all to the release’s detriment—rather, it recalls the stylistic play and emotional frankness of Arthur Russell’s World of Echo—and this unfinished quality is a crucial method of delivery. The minimal “Schoolhouse,” which lasts 43 seconds, sees Coates’ bright picked strings weighted by a teasing beat. “I’ll Keep Going” is more lush, even mournful, the titular refrain repeated in a smeary drone over piano and deep, sustained cello notes. Coates’ instrumentation is lovely but understated, folding effortlessly into the clattering productions such that prim classical connotations feel like afterthoughts. Even when the cello is brought to the fore—on “County H,” for example, which consists of just strings and a barely-tonal radio-transmitter-like sound—it’s repetitive, textural, and melodically restrained, again bringing Russell to mind.More traditional strains of contemporary experimental music can at times be weighed down by their own history. And while Levi and Coates are clearly products of certain traditions, their influences are widespread. Tracks like the fragmentary “Xhill Stepping” or “New Wren Kitch,” which has the feel of an unraveling Actress B-side, nod to UK hip-hop and garage; scrawls of noise and vocal modulations bridge into brainy, gallery-bound sound work. The unfussy way Levi and Coates negotiate these references keeps this album from sounding like self-conscious pastiche. All the while, Remain Calm (like most of the projects Levi has been attached to) maintains a loping pace, easy and cool even as instrumental flourishes nervously flutter.The breadth of Levi’s career offers an exciting framework for a new generation of musicians looking to uproot themselves and move—as might be most intuitive in our contemporary cultural economy—in several directions at once. We sense less a linear evolution in her sound and more a continual, varied expansion, driven by collaborations like this that are rooted in improvisation, as well as more rigid, genre-driven assignments. (Coates, too, negotiates between projects this way: He played with the London Contemporary Orchestra on Radiohead’s A Moon Shaped Pool, for one, but this year also released Upstepping, a solo LP of oddball deep house.) Remain Calm is particularly refreshing for its relative approachability, no doubt the product of sly pop and dance sensibilities that are lodged somewhere in there alongside the open-ended phrases and sonic atmospherics. Even as its mood slides from pensive to morose to quietly exuberant, this remains throughout one of the more enjoyable experimental releases this year.“The reality of dance music is that it encompasses more than just dance music,” the 25-year-old DJ and producer Jay Daniel recently told an interviewer asking about the Detroit music scene. He also seemed to be displaying his career ambitions in a single sentence. After several notable years as a prodigious house and techno talent, Daniel is cautiously expanding his purview. “I’m called a techno artist when really I’m a drummer,” he said. “I want to be referred to as a musician more so than a DJ.”Since 2013 the Detroit artist has shared a handful of scatterbrained 12”-single and EP releases, improving in strides along the way. The progression has been leading up to an official debut called Broken Knowz, his first long player and also the first time he’s fully centering live percussion in his production, shifting purposefully from programming drums in favor of channelling his own considerable chops. Daniel grew up in Detroit with his mother, the elusive soulful house singer Naomi Daniel, and then in Maryland with his father, where he picked up a pair of drumsticks and played throughout high-school. “I feel go-go had an effect on the way I see and hear music,” he once said of his time away from Detroit. “The cadence and syncopation is different from any other music. I could have played in a band, but it’s easier to make music by yourself.” Accordingly, this debut feels like a solitary affair, full of the type of obsessive layering that can only be accomplished by a single pair of hands. The nine songs on Broken Knowz brim with meticulous, meditative production, and Daniel’s drumming is a revelation throughout. Instead of chopping up his drum sounds and triggering them individually, the artist uses multiple tracks to layer and loop percussion takes he recorded in his mother’s Detroit basement. As a result, the rhythms on Broken Knowz sound alive and slinky, and somehow despite all the singular attention nothing on it sounds fussy.  Daniel diverts sounds like a sleight-of-hand artist. A busily tapped hi-hat clouds the driving kick-drum of “1001 Nights” before a clipping sound builds into a galloping rhythmic element. Like any artist making dance music, Daniel revels in repetition, and he digs up little revelations inside his evolving loops. It’s an easy, popular trick to build a track up by its components, and while Daniel frequently relies on song-length crescendos of complexity, he arranges his layers with nuance and restraint, introducing certain sounds as flashy highlights and others as inconspicuous building blocks.“Paradise Valley” is an obvious standout, and it’s also a bit of a red herring in its lush feel, a brilliant dose of shifty electronic funk that betrays some of the deeper and more austere grooves that follow. Unlike many of the songs on Broken Knowz, Daniel leads from the start with a shimmering synth that soars over a clanking percussive element. The producer taps a cowbell like a funky metronome in the right channel before a warbling synth lead rises and squirms above everything else. It’s busy and quirky, naturally just-so.In interviews and as a DJ, Jay Daniel comes off studious and workmanlike, hyper and humbly self-aware of the Detroit music scene he inhabits. With Broken Knowz he’s fully built up his own identity. The live drum sounds are an obvious advancement in the producer’s craft and personality, but he’s also doubling down in his Detroit diligence, digging deeper into his already deep house and techno roots with sharpened tools. He’s finding old ways to do new things.It was probably overstated, but a few years ago the podcast 99% Invisible made a provocative argument for R.E.M.’s Out of Time as the most politically significant album in American history—not for its content, but for its packaging. The band, the story goes, was wary of releasing the CD in a longbox, the superfluous cardboard packaging that compact discs came in during the format’s early years, so an idealistic Warner Brothers executive pitched them on the idea of putting that wasted packaging to use. The back of the box would include a Rock the Vote petition lobbying senators to support a bill enabling citizens to register to vote at DMVs or through the mail. Those petitions flowed into Congress by the thousands, and the bill eventually passed, leading to a historic influx of new young voters.  The podcast’s numbers are a little fuzzy, so it may be a stretch to directly credit R.E.M. for the bill’s passage. But if nothing else, the story speaks to the band’s stature at the time. In 1991, R.E.M. weren’t just huge; they were important, and the Rock the Vote petition certainly wouldn’t have had the same impact if it hadn’t been packaged around such an enormously popular record. Out of Time gave the band their biggest hit single, netted them three Grammys, and eventually sold more than 18 million copies worldwide, numbers that insured the band the capital to do more or less whatever they wanted for the rest of their career. Along with Nevermind, released a half year later, it was the ideal every major label aspired to during their great independent-artist grab of the early ’90s: a blockbuster that multiplied the band’s following without ticking off existing fans.  Out of Time is a weird entry in R.E.M.’s discography, although in fairness the same can be said of almost every album R.E.M. released during that stretch. Numb from a year on the road, the band largely cast aside the usual electric guitars to fiddle with other instruments, most prominently the mandolin, which Peter Buck claimed he was still teaching himself when he stumbled upon the riff for “Losing My Religion.” Twenty-five years later, that single remains the most perfect pop song R.E.M. ever crafted, but it was hardly a fluke. The longing harpsichord on the album’s other great ballad, “Half a World Away,” is almost as enchanting, while the Beach Boys-bright “Near Wild Heaven” is almost overwhelming in its beauty and generosity. The whole record is flush with violins and cellos, revealing a range and sophistication that none of its predecessors had ever even hinted at.  Of course, Out of Time is sometimes remembered as much for its stylistic overreach as much as it is for all that elegance. It’s the album with “Country Feedback,” the rawest expression of sheer remorse the band ever captured on tape, but also the album with “Shiny Happy People,” a song that to this day many R.E.M. diehards would just as soon will out of existence. On one side it’s got bassist Mike Mills’ most sublime lead vocal turn on string-swept “Texarkana”; on the other it’s got KRS-One on “Radio Song” wailing like the Big Bopper over a wacky organ lick. Somehow, making one of the fiercest rappers of his era sound like such a colossal clown remains the album’s most perplexing legacy.  A quarter century removed from its release, though, those missteps are easy to write off as endearing period trappings. If anything, the album now sounds more like the masterpiece it felt just short of at the time, a work nearly on par with its more universally regarded, nocturnal sequel Automatic for the People. Warner Brothers’ anniversary reissue gives the album the usual deluxe treatment, with a second disc of demos mostly of interest for the glimpse they provide into the band’s process. “Losing My Religion,” for instance, is presented as both a somewhat uncertain instrumental and as a lean, string-less rock song. You can also hear Michael Stipe not quite hit the high notes on an early version of “Near Wild Heaven.”   Much more worthwhile is a third disc included on pricier versions of the reissue: a live, Unplugged-esque performance for a West Virginia public radio broadcast. Since the band had opted against a big tour behind Out of Time, they sound refreshed and just a little under-rehearsed. Stipe’s reverential, beat-poetry recitation of KRS-One’s “Radio Song” verse aside, the band goes out of their way not to take themselves too seriously. Mills leads a demure rendition of the Troggs’ flower-power standard “Love Is All Around,” then Billy Bragg and Robyn Hitchcock join in to bring some honky-tonk rowdiness to a giddy cover of Jimmie Dale Gilmore’s “Dallas.” R.E.M. were one of the biggest bands in the world, but even coming off of their most high-minded record to date—and performing on a day that West Virginia’s governor had christened “R.E.M. Day,” at that—they still sounded like the same gang of old friends who drunkenly recorded a jingle for their favorite barbeque spot for an early B-side. The weight of their newfound importance would eventually take a toll on the group. It hadn’t yet.It’s good to remember the improbable things in life. For example: “Uptown Funk” vocalist and animatronic sequined suit Bruno Mars once sang the words “loungin’ on the couch just chillin’ in my Snuggie.” Every part of it is retroactively bizarre: the idea that Mars, the hardest-working embodiment of the “hardest-working man in showbiz” cliche, once attached himself to something called “The Lazy Song”; that he once aligned himself with flash-in-the-pan acoustic bros like Travie McCoy; or, more broadly, that he used to make pop in the 2010s that sounded like the 2010s. Much has been made of Mars’ childhood stint as an Elvis impersonator, with reason. The same talent that allowed a squeaky 4-year-old to channel, uncannily, the King’s gruff bark and distant whiff of scandal is the talent that allows Mars to inhabit whatever he wants. He’s as convincing a cheeky horndog (early hits with his production group the Smeezingtons include Flo Rida’s cheesy-sleazy hit “Right Round” and Mike Posner’s dubiously conceived “Bow Chicka Wow Wow”) as he is a worshipful loverman (the chaste stretch from “Nothin’ on You” through “Grenade”); he's as eager an omnivorous music fan (the Unorthodox Jukebox era remade Billy Joel and the Police as faithfully as any R&B or funk referents) as the comparatively laser-focused revivalist of 24K Magic. Also improbable: that “Uptown Funk,” still inescapable at weddings and stadiums near you, still has life in it, let alone an album’s worth. The title track to 24K Magic is all but an explicit retread: YSL swapped out for designer minks, Chucks for Inglewood’s finest shoes, corny “dragon wanna retire, man” line for corny line about red getting the blues, “Oops Upside Your Head” biting swapped out for only slightly less lawsuit-prone Zapp voiceover vocoders. What it lacks in a hook it makes up for (almost) with vibe, and more importantly, earnestness.  24K Magic, the album, sticks to the same well-trod path. It often comes off as a one-man recreation of Mark Ronson’s similarly retro-fetishist Uptown Special—Ronson himself was tapped early on as a potential collaborator—with one key difference: all roles here are filled by Mars. Aside from a couple guest production jobs by former collaborators Jeff Bhasker and Emile Haynie, the album is largely produced by Shampoo Press & Curl—a mildly reorganized incarnation of the Smeezingtons. And as Mars boasted in pre-album press, there are no features. The idea is that he needs no features. He’s become practically all things to all people—he has enough session-wonk credibility to appeal to the Grammy-voting industry types who’ve adopted Mars as a standard-bearer for Real Musicianship; he has enough pop and R&B cred to keep the radio listeners around; enough showmanship to pull off a Super Bowl halftime performance while barely into his career; enough wedding-reception goofiness to ingratiate himself to anyone left over. The line between lovingly recreating the music of the past and cynically 3D-printing it for easy profit is fine and much fretted-over, sometimes at book length. And indeed, 24K Magic aims to recreate a time and a vibe much of its personnel weren’t even around for. (Said producer and Mars collaborator Brody Brown of a side project that sounds suspiciously 24K Magic-adjacent: “It’s going to make you feel like 1985—even though I wasn’t born until 1989.”) But in a self-conscious Vegas-revival way, 24K Magic pulls it off. It helps that it compresses all Mars’ personae into one. Go back to Smeezingtons cowrite “Fuck You” and you’ll find a blueprint: a retro-obsessed guy who makes songs your great-uncle recognizes, that also happens to be really, really horny. It helps that the album is barely over 30 minutes and meticulously sequenced, and it also helps that Mars is a notorious perfectionist (in a Rolling Stone interview earlier this year, he bragged about the dozens of versions of these tracks that got scrapped because the vibe wasn't right; routine studio business, to be sure, but Mars evidently takes it more seriously than most).It helps that the past couple years have gradually whetted pop audiences’ appetite for sounds that might have once been considered too chintzy for top 40. “Perm” may be yet another attempt to revive James Brown, but while it isn’t quite as convincing as Mystikal’s would-be resurrection on Uptown Special, it does gives us the deliberate anachronism of a James Brown song with the line “forget your Instagram and your Twitter.” “That’s What I Like” is a song about opulence that sounds it—it’s sort of like what The 20/20 Experience thought it was—while “Versace on the Floor” and “Too Good to Say Goodbye” are as faithful recreations of mid-’90s R&B as you’ll find outside the decade, from the roller-rink synths of the former to the latter’s slow-dance power balladry (albeit one that, if it actually came out then, would mostly recall Luther doing “Superstar”).But most of all, it helps that Mars is a consummate performer; this kind of showmanship is  much more convincing, and coherent, from one showman than from one dilettante producer. If “Uptown Funk” was the theme-park version of one sliver of funk, 24K Magic is the rest of the park: rebuilt shinier and glitzier and safer, every element engineered to please more than the real thing, and with a hell of a tour guide. It’s not history, not even historical fiction, but harmless fun. Keita Sano seems unsettled. This is true both in the producer's releases—15 singles and now four albums on 14 different labels, in two-plus years, and that's just accounting the physical releases—and his productions, which veer wildly from gnarly disco-based house to noisy, almost experimental techno to downtempo groove. The Okayama, Japan-based artist is probably most closely aligned with labels like Mister Saturday Night and 1080p, North American labels with a DIY spirit and a fondness for off-kilter statements, but even in that light Sano has proven himself a singular presence.Keita Sano is Sano's fourth album, give or take, and it arrives via Rett I Fletta, a sub-label of Prins Thomas' Full Pupp imprint, because for Sano anything worth doing is worth doing obtusely. Still, Keita Sano feels like the producer's most grounded and focused work yet: seven long tracks aimed at the dance floor, each one a treatise on how varied and dauntless Sano has become. These are tracks that fit into no particular paradigm or scene; they are stuffed with ideas, all of which hope to make you dance. Sano's debts to both house and techno are obvious—Thomas remarked he was drawn to how he “somehow managed to merge the playfulness of disco with the physical impact of techno”—but feel beside the point. Sano isn't a politician crossing the aisle, he's just grabbing whatever works.Accordingly, the tracks on Keita Sano are as familiar as they are hard to pin down. Squelchy acid licks (“Leave the Floor,” “Full of Love”) rub shoulders with filtered disco (“Honey”) and percussion loops of unknown origin (“Sucker Pt. 2”). “Vood” clangs with hissy industrial energy for more than three minutes before opening up into a calm, looping melody. Sano's tracks are long and evolving but there's very little psychedelia or escapism in his sound; everything is very physical and present, and his peculiar choices prevent you from losing yourself. Only on the closer, “None of Your Business,” when Sano slips into a kind of contented, deep house formalism, does Keita Sano fail to feel fidgety, strange, and emotive.This is, to a large extent, music for the heads: Sano is a precocious and enigmatic producer but Sano is unlikely to convert agnostics. For anyone inclined, though, Sano is a true talent, an artist for whom “sticking to his guns” is great because his guns are so much different than everyone else’s. Keita Sano is his calmest and most manageable work yet, a fine place to start tracking an artist who seems unlikely to sit still for long.Tredici Bacci bandleader Simon Hanes really loves the work of Italian film composer Ennio Morricone. Hanes’ love isn't subtle. Even if he didn't discuss Morricone so much in the press, the Morricone influence literally screams out at you from the music on Tredici Bacci’s debut full-length, Amore Per Tutti. Deriving its title from Fellini’s Nino Rota-scored classic Juliet of the Spirits, Amore Per Tutti is nothing if not defined by Hanes’ college-age immersion into 1950s and ’60s Italian cinema as his attraction to Morricone grew into an obsession. It’s always a risky proposition when an artist references a specific influence with such laser focus. Listeners who lack the artist’s passion for the source material are likely to shrug, while fellow aficionados are bound to nitpick the music as not authentic enough on the one hand or too authentic on the other. Likeminded acts such as Antibalas, Debo Band, and Secret Chiefs 3 face a similar conundrum—and even inspire culture-vulture debates—with their respective modernizations of Afrobeat, Ethiopian, and Persian forms.To his credit, even as Hanes pilots the 14-piece Tredici Bacci through narrow stylistic straits, his enthusiasm burns through in the band’s exuberance. He also injects the music with a persistent sense of levity that the band sustains even during the album’s most soaring moments. Additionally, Hanes wrote these tunes as an attempt to extract the poppiest aspects of Morricone’s scores, which gives Amore Per Tutti a concise feel in spite of its grand orchestral sweep.On album opener “Columbo,” a grainy electric guitar figure blends seamlessly with horns that echo and harmonize against the same root notes while also heralding a grand arrival—the type of thing you might hear in an old Hollywood epic to invoke a sense of ancient Roman glory. Those horns do announce a grand arrival, but it comes in the form of a snakelike central hook with heavy traces of Greek/Turkish modality. The band maneuvers through such sequences with an impeccable agility that's easy to miss behind the music's melodramatic exterior.Meanwhile, the album doesn’t attempt to recreate the musty ambience of old film. Instead of making you feel like an archivist poring over film footage and academic texts written by grad students, the music's crisp production feels very much anchored in the moment, which only accentuates the music’s springy good-time bounce, and very nearly passes Morricone off as party music. (It would have to be a certain type of party, of course, but one imagines Hanes wants us to crank the music up and have fun rather than sit there namedropping cinematic references for sport.)On “Avante,” for instance, the band cranks-up the melodrama, as playful operatic vocals accompany a guitar line and galloping rhythm that are obviously fashioned in “spaghetti western” style. It’s funny, even goofy; in fact, it's hard to listen to a song like “Avante” without breaking into laughter, as you picture clip-clopping horses and the strangely distorted Italian conception of the American west. Hanes probably wouldn't have it any other way. In the years following the 2007 release of the most recent Burial album, Untrue, we barely heard from the London producer born William Bevan. There was a 12” a couple of years later that found him collaborating with Four Tet, but nothing in terms of solo material until the 2011 EP Street Halo. With that release, what seemed at first to be a diversion until the next full-length came along turned out to be something more significant: Burial was shaping his music to fit a new format and finding inspiration in its limitations.The 12” vinyl EP, with a total playing time in the range of 20 to 30 minutes, proved to be the ideal canvas for new Burial creations. When no longer charged with sustaining a mood for LP length, he was able to pack more sounds and ideas into smaller spaces, incorporating rhythms from across the dance music spectrum and becoming more deft in his use of voices along the way. As important as Untrue may be to the recent history of electronic music, his EPs contain some of his finest work.The 12”s became annual “event” records that seemed all-too-happy to slip back into the ether; the last two, 2013’s Rival Dealer and 2012’s Truant/Rough Sleeper, came out in during the sleepy release month of December, after the year-end lists had been compiled, and when a new year of music was just around the corner. December ’14 and ’15 brought precious little Burial music, but then Black Friday brought a surprise in the form of a new Hyperdub 12”, “Young Death” b/w “Nightmarket.”It’s not quite fair to compare this record to the last four EPs, if only because this release is considerably shorter at 13 minutes. But the record feels comparatively minor in other ways. Each of the last few records introduced a new twist to the project, whether production density or a 4/4 house thump or an extra-musical idea, like the touching statement that Rival Dealer was designed as a balm for people subjected to bullying. As they arrived in succession, it was uncanny how much more Bevan could squeeze out of the narrow parameters of his style. But this 12” finds the project in a lull; it sounds like Burial (ghostly voices, clattering metal, vinyl crackle, funeral keyboard lines, all present and accounted for), which means it reaches a certain threshold for dark atmospheric beauty, but there’s very little to distinguish it otherwise.Beats for the two tracks are almost non-existent, which might suggest that the intention is something closer to ambient music, but the songs don’t stick around long enough to be immersive. “Young Death” features a lovely repeating vocal bit featuring the phrase “I will always be there for you,” underscoring the fact that warmth and empathy were always at the heart of the Burial project, but the voice floats freely, never connecting to its surroundings. “Nightmarket” is a touch more engaging and adds some jittery John Carpenter-style keyboard textures, but it too feels like it’s gathering itself for something that never arrives. Both tracks feel like small pieces of a larger piece we don’t get to hear; there’s a wispy, vaporous, interlude quality to each, like we’re in a place where something just happened or something is about to happen but the present moment is all suggestion. If you’ve gone outside in Los Angeles County since November 8, you’ve heard “FDT.” YG and Nipsey Hussle’s skeletal protest song—the one that made the Secret Service come knocking all the way back in April—had a brief run during the primaries, but became an anthem shortly after the election was called for The Donald. “I like white folks, but I don’t like you”: Within 24 hours of the election results, there were effigies burning at City Hall and protesters choking off the 110. “I’m ‘bout to turn Black Panther”; across Temple and down Figueroa, through South Central and over to the Beaches, the song rattled from Priuses and pickup trucks and seventh-story windows. “And if your ass do win, you gon’ probably get smoked.”The overtly political is nothing new for YG. He’s been handing out groceries and school supplies with Compton mayor Aja Brown; he ended his sophomore album, Still Brazy with a three-song suite that tackled gross, race-based injustice. The first was “FDT,” but the next two (“Blacks and Brown” and “Police Get Away Wit Murder”) take aim at a state that can be murderous no matter who’s at the helm. And so with Red Friday, the new seven-song EP dropped on short notice, YG is back on the throttle, rushing ahead, nearly unbothered.Red Friday finds him darting across the Pro Tools sessions, more nimble than he’s ever been before. Sonic landmarks of L.A. rap come and go over the course of the record, but the tempo is constantly being pushed. Some of that comes courtesy of DJ Mustard, YG’s longtime creative partner who was completely absent from Still Brazy after the two had a personal falling out. “Get Out Yo Feelin’s” in particular is a testament to their rediscovered chemistry: Mustard’s eerie undertones and breathless drums make YG and RJ’s wisecracks from the club sounds sinister, even unhinged. And “Down Bitch,” which should be a pretty rote song about loyal girlfriends, comes out sounding like a Christmas carol that took too much ketamine.There’s no songwriting on Red Friday as instantly quotable as “Twist My Fingaz” or as sneakily brilliant as “Bool, Balm, & Bollective,” but what YG ends up rapping is tight and economical—and occasionally vivid. “I Be On,” an unfeeling rebuff to main girls and side girls alike is delivered gleefully, then qualified by acknowledging the drink in his hand. On “I Know,” he opens his verse with a three-bar riff on Houston one-hit wonder Mike Jones’ existence, then doubles down on his taunts to those rappers who need handholding to make the transition from grassroots fame to national stardom.But without question, the crown jewel of Red Friday is “One Time Comin’,” a frenzied blur of guns and paranoia. YG gets pulled over by a police officer, presumably because someone with his complexion shouldn’t be driving a Maybach; his mind darts to the last moments he was able to spend with his baby daughter. It ends with a bridge that couldn’t be more unambiguous, a complete rebuke of the Los Angeles Police Department and those who support it. That YG decided to deliver it over such an urgent beat—and on such short notice that his label might have fumbled the release—is simply a nod to the days we live in. There’s not much time to waste.You Blew It! frontman Tanner Jones once sang, “I’m tired of all these toss ups and all this feigned motivation/But I’ve always felt fine singing in your basement,” but that was two years ago—before they played much bigger rooms opening for pop-punk institutions Taking Back Sunday, Motion City Soundtrack, and the Wonder Years. In interviews for their third LP Abendrot, Jones commented that “at some point you start to become less pleased with songs you wrote for basements and living rooms.” For a young band on an upward career arc, this might indicate an embrace of the loud, obvious gestures necessary to level up: a preemptive non-apology to the hardcore, protective fanbase as a much larger one awaits. But as with the most recent work of Modern Baseball, Sorority Noise, and Turnover, you get the sense from the inquisitive and insular Abendrot that You Blew It! simply saw a bigger version of “the basement” on those tours, a mental and spiritual holding cell where bands always have to be pop-punk, both sonically and lyrically. And so Abendrot is borne of You Blew It!’s desire to engage with the outside world, not to dominate it. As some of modern emo’s proudest traditionalists, You Blew It! know how to signify “mature third LP”: beginning with a solo, homesick introduction is a good start, as is calling it “Epaulette.” In fact, most of the song titles likewise abide by the time-honored emo-band practice of exchanging quirk and in-jokes for thesaurus-thumbing (“Autotheology,” “Kerning”), geographical signifiers (“Greenwood,” “Arrowhead”) and neologism (“Minorwye”).This continues the trajectory of their 2015 EP Pioneer of Nothing, which did away with the spittle-flecked spite of their best-known songs, “Award of the Year Award” and “The Fifties.” But while Abendrot is a natural progression, it’s rarely effortless: particularly during its first half, You Blew It! audibly have to restrain themselves from their old habits. “Like Myself” and “Sundial Song” are littered with lyrics that wouldn’t be out of place on Grow Up, Dude (“I don’t feel like myself or anyone else,” “I can’t control my insides!”), but rather than careening into the choruses, the band pulls back on the distortion and shifts rhythms, doing whatever it takes to avoid the cutting one-liners and slashing power chords that Jones once felt were necessary.Even at their most aggressive, the guitars on a You Blew It! song were unabashedly pretty, and while Into It. Over It.’s Evan Weiss returns to produce, Abendrot discards the lush, saturated sound of Keep Doing What You’re Doing for something more subdued. This isn’t slick by any means, but it reframes the leaves-bare placidity and exploratory interplay of Mineral’s EndSerenading, American Football, and Sunny Day Real Estate’s second LP into pop-punk song structure.More notably, Jones’ lyrical concerns are no longer directed at you and the countless ways in which you’ve disappointed him. Jones is mostly confused about his own place in the world, of how to live in the moment with an overactive brain and how to move forward despite a crippling fear of failure. Though less vindictive and more reflective, the underlying emotions aren’t all that different than they were on previous You Blew It! records, and Jones can capture their essence on a memorably worded chorus without shouting it: “when God dies, I’ll skip the funeral,” he moans during the Manchester Orchestra-ted grunge lurch of “Autotheology.”But when Jones seems compelled to transmogrify his thoughts into art, he ends up twisting himself into knots: “When the skin and vessels underneath/Choose this space for bruising/I’m somewhere in between/Clumsily pulling on the strings”; “If I could lay down, I’d let my cells accept the grounds.” It’s easy to figure out what Jones is trying to get at, but Abendrot’s lyrics often feel like writing for the sake of writing, labored rather than layered.Like anyone else who recently graduated from college and is trying to create a clear boundary between their earlier life and adulthood, Jones recognizes his desire for growth but searches for something palpable to push for. It’s common and relatable stuff, and Abendrot never feels dishonest, just occasionally overwrought in its desire to achieve the stakes and transcendence of similarly inspired records like Holy Ghost or Goodness. Fortunately, You Blew It! just as often let their guitars speak for their behalf and Abendrot can be heard as the completion of a directive started by their last two albums: grow up, dude and keep doing what you’re doing.There are times—times of year, times in life, times in an election cycle, maybe—that an escape is needed. Or a cushion for a weary head. Or a curtain to block out the world. Ambient music is often good for that. It can be comfort music, security-blanket music, spark-a-joint-and-go-to-sleep music. As Kevin Drumm once put it, in a song title from his 2009 album Imperial Horizon, “Just Lay Down and Forget It” music.But some ambient music manages to stretch, however gingerly, beyond those fallback modes. It can soothe, yet still make you curious. It can calm and unsettle in equal measure. Brian Eno said that ambient music should be “as ignorable as it is interesting.” But what gets forgotten in that formulation is that ambient music, at least the really good stuff, should also be as interesting as it is ignorable.You may find yourself replaying a piece of music like that multiple times in a single sitting—not just because it’s appealingly immersive, but because every time it plays, there’s a question that goes unanswered. It might be a question you can’t really articulate. It might have to do with process: how the music was made, or what time signature it’s in, or something more abstruse, like where the notes end and the effects begin. (These aren’t necessarily things you even think about consciously, but you tease them out nonetheless, tugging at them like you might with a bar puzzle while your mind was far away.) Maybe you simply don’t know quite how it makes you feel. And in some circumstances—say, for instance, that you know that you otherwise feel just shit-awful—that openness is a good thing. It creates a space of possibility.Back in the early years of the decade, Suzanne Kraft—Los Angeles’ Diego Herrera, who today lives in Amsterdam—was making Metro Area-influenced house and disco, springy and dubby and slow, good music for the early or very late hour on the dancefloor. By last year’s Talk From Home, also for London’s Melody As Truth label, he had eased into a more contemplative mode: gentle synthesizers, clean-toned guitar, lilting cadences flecked with the LinnDrum’s telltale ping-pong thwack. Much in the vein of his label-mate Jonny Nash’s group Gaussian Curve, it was airy and spacious, and its final track, “The Result,” hinted at something even more ethereal in its beatless synths and fretless bass.His new album picks up where “The Result” left off. Across much of it, there is almost nothing there beyond synthesizers, a few stray horns, and faint echo in place of connective tissue. Even the cuts with drums are essentially ambient in feel: In “Bank,” a song reminiscent of both K. Leimer and Shy Layers, a tentative drum groove frames watery synths and tendrils of guitar. Something about its overlapping layers makes it difficult to determine where phrases begin and end, and it sways gently back and forth, like a small craft rocked by waves. “One Amongst Others” moves with a similar sort of fast/slow tempo, and it counts out in five-bar phrases instead of four—a structural quirk that leaves you feeling off balance, even if you don’t realize it. Its cool, brooding chords, meanwhile, also have an unsettled air, shifting back and forth in search of the root note like a cat choosing a place to lie down.Those are the most substantial tracks. “Fragile” offers just two sets of chords fluttering in counterpoint; quiet, scratchy bursts of distortion emphasize the outer surface of the sound, and a momentary bend in pitch gives the impression that the music is about to slide off the tape entirely. The wintry “Zé” is just muted tones and atonal squiggles that move like startled birds. And “Scripted Space,” warm as a freshly baked batch of muffins, is similarly minimalist, with arpeggios tripping up the scale and trickling back down through the delay chain. The sequence of notes is so fleet and slippery that you can’t quite fix upon them, certainly not enough to sing them back to yourself. The delay functions not as a crutch but as a channel, a conduit—not a way of filling space, but of revealing it.The bookending “Body Heat” and “Further” are more lyrical—particularly the opener, with its mournful, drifting saxophones—but they’re hardly much more substantial; they seem more like conjuring acts than compositions. It’s striking how much Herrera manages with such meager materials. It’s not that the music is calming, which it is; it’s the way it gets under your skin, the way the ripples on the surface suggest hidden forces below. This short, gently melancholy album offers solace while rejecting the soporific. It is a cushion to fall back upon—one just springy enough, perhaps, to set you in motion again.Who is the Weeknd? That’s the question a lot of us asked when the act first materialized, fully-formed, with 2011’s House of Balloons. Thanks to the group’s savvy anti-publicity campaign, the question had a literal bent: who are the people who made these songs? Fast-forward five years and there’s little mystery remaining when it comes to the provenance of the Weeknd’s music—like so many modern pop songs, his are now designed in consultation with a committee of experts. And yet, even as we watch Abel Tesfaye walk the red carpet in the light of day, the question remains: Who is the Weeknd? Is he a drugged-out lothario? A beloved pop star? A nihilist foil to Drake? The second coming of Michael Jackson? The runaway success of last years’ Beauty Behind the Madness—two No. 1 singles and over two million units sold in the U.S.—seemed like it might finally force an answer to this question. And yet, Starboy, the Weeknd’s sixth overall album and third for a major label, only further muddies the waters.Initially, there were signs that Starboy would represent a much-needed pivot, a rethinking of a sound and image that seemed to have run its course, from DIY mixtapes to the top of the charts. The album’s lead video features Tesfaye murdering a past version of himself before taking a cross-shaped bat to a condo full of awards and sales plaques. Starboy, however, is hardly a dramatic reinvention—if anything, it feels like a watered-down retread of the same old tropes. Beauty Behind the Madness managed to smuggle sleaze into the mainstream by refining Tesfaye’s pop songcraft, even as it doubled down on the darkness. Starboy eases up on both fronts, recycling melodies, ideas, and even whole songs while presenting a sanitized version of the Weeknd that often lacks any real sense of perspective. It’s a curious move for a guy who so decisively managed to succeed on his own terms.As if to guarantee that it feels like a slog, Starboy is also overstuffed: over an hour of music stretching out over 18 songs, many of them bland. “Rockin’” sounds like a label executive’s idea of what the Weeknd could be: inoffensive club pop tailor-made for office karaoke parties (“I just want your body next to me/’Cause it brings me so much ecstasy/We can just be rockin’, yeah”). “False Alarm” snatches defeat from the jaws of victory, its sublime opening harmonies devolving into a screamed chorus that’s as contrived as Michael Jackson’s bellow at the beginning of “Scream.” “Six Feet Under,” a collaboration with Future, is essentially just a rewrite of the pair's much sharper “Low Life” (“Reminder” also recycles the vocal melody from “Low Life”); both here and on “All I Know,” the melodically-gifted rapper feels sorely underutilized. Kendrick Lamar’s verse on the autotune-heavy “Sidewalks” is characteristically dexterous but even he sounds a bit unenthused to be here. It’s hard to blame him.There are a few bright spots on Starboy, moments that feel guided by a stronger vision. Both of the Daft Punk collaborations are satisfying, if hardly groundbreaking; “Starboy” glides like a sleek, high-performance car, while “I Feel It Coming” sounds like a slowed-down version of “Get Lucky.” “Secrets” pushes the Weeknd’s nocturnal sound into new wave territory, borrowing washes of clean guitar from Tears for Fears’ “Pale Shelter” and lifting the chorus from the Romantics’ “Talking in Your Sleep” wholesale. “True Colors” sounds like a ’90s R&B slow burner produced by Noah “40” Shebib (who was once apocryphally rumored to have ghost produced for the Weeknd). And “Ordinary Life” proves that Tesfaye is still more than capable of raising eyebrows, opening with a vivid description of fellatio behind the wheel before taking a hard left into petite mort fatalism (“David Carradine, I’ma die when I come”).Starboy’s most interesting song is barely even a song. The two-minute-long “Stargirl Interlude,” finds Lana Del Rey reprising her role as Tesfaye’s foil, relating a pornographic “vision” over a minimal backing track, before Tesfaye closes out the song by cooing, “I just want to see you shine, ’cause I know you are a Stargirl.” The brief snippet is filled with the sort of tension that’s so lacking from most of Starboy, playing up the theatrics for which both artists are known. “I feel like we’ve always been talking to each other through our music,” Tesfaye said of Del Rey in an interview last year. “She is the girl in my music, and I am the guy in her music.” Here, the pair embrace that meta-narrative, responding to their perceived lack of authenticity by retreating fully into the pop fantasy where their characters connect. It’s a boldly self-aware move, one that smartly manages to wring art from artifice.Starboy could use a lot more of this kind of audacity or really, any kind of coherent storytelling that challenges, complicates or further illuminates our understanding of the unfeeling villain that Tesfaye has been playing since day one. Instead, we get a grab bag of difficult to reconcile contradictions: a “Party Monster,” on one track, a doe-eyed balladeer on another (“Die for You”). Tesfaye used to be near-obsessive about packaging projects that felt narratively whole—after all, this is the guy who released an entire trilogy of interconnected albums in his first year. Starboy, by way of contrast, feels more like an opportunistic compilation of B-sides than an album. Who is the Weeknd? At this point, even the man behind the curtain might not know.Three years out from PC Music’s inception, it would be rash to deny the label/genre/cultural microphenomenon’s influence—not just in terms of the sheer number of think-pieces generated in its wake, but in the trickle-down of its aesthetic signatures. Take, for example, the breathy single “3 Strikes” by maybe-Kylie Jenner-fronted teen-pop act Terror Jr. The song’s otherwise unimaginative pop skeleton (lilting beat, insipid lyrics) is rendered magnetic through chilly vocal manipulation and melodic elements, which are at once dreamlike and austere. In other words, it sounds like an A.G. Cook production on a fistful of downers. This is not to mention the expertly-constructed hype around the band itself: an anonymous female vocalist, a debut via a lipgloss advertisement—straight from the PC playbook.Gradually seeping into the mainstream is par for the course for electronic music subcultures, but Cook and company are a bit more insistent in the totality of their goals. By one description, 2016 is the year that PC Music “grabbed the mainstream by the throat and made it take notice.” But listening to the PC Music, Vol. 2 compilation, I felt less subsumed and more worn out. Is it feasible for a microgenre that’s all candy-coating, all self-consciously hyper-“contemporary” veneer, to expect to sustain itself long-term? And, while this perhaps overestimates the sincerity of PC Music’s mission, is it possible that such mainstream-seizing objectives are built around a faulty understanding of how culture flows? In any event, PC Music, Vol. 2 collects 10 tracks, most previously released, which follow the blueprint laid out by last year’s Vol. 1. Though the tracks clock in at varying degrees of hyperactivity (GFOTY’s full-throttle “Poison” perhaps the worst of the bunch for the high-BPM-averse), each reaches for anthem status. The productions cobble together and iron over a mix of styles appropriated from both the dance underground and Top 40, with results that are structurally varied, but with a uniform surface. Among the better offerings is easyFun’s “Monopoly,” whose bouncy hook is propelled by clean synths and infantile vocal manipulation. Felicita’s “a new family” seethes, horror-film whispers emerging from underneath the sort of crunchy torrent of sound favored by so-called post-club producers. Some songs bridge directly into a stylized take on radio pop—Danny L Harle’s Carly Rae Jepsen-featuring “Super Natural,” for example, a disquietingly innocent hit that could easily have been underwritten by the Disney Channel. If this compilation evidences any real evolution in the PC Music sound, it’s in this assimilated direction: less sinister, more widely marketable. As a conceptual project that embraces HD aesthetics wholesale, PC Music has always felt dated to me; it’s in this context that comparisons to post-internet art—variously unflattering to either camp, depending on your vantage point—seem most apt. Its desire to comment on the hypermediated nature of being young today is similarly tiresome: lyrics often conjure a lonely girl on her phone, waiting for a notification to advance the plot, a rather flattened image of sexuality and longing. Can’t we agree by now that, however smooth our screens, technology tends more often to reveal and amplify an inherent messiness in human relationships? This is not to mention the genre’s overwhelming whiteness, or its tendency to treat women as avatars, recurring points that rather definitively undermine PC Music’s critical capabilities. But a masterfully constructed pop song can be indelible, and if you peel back the ill-advised art-project histrionics, there are a handful of those here. Harle’s “Broken Flowers,” first released in 2013, is an excellent piece of cyborg house, addictive but never overwhelming. “Only You,” by Chinese pop star Chris Lee—one of the biggest-ticket names and a rare non-white collaborator, it is worth noting, for a group of producers so transparently indebted to East Asian pop culture—builds at a treacly pace, as the minimalist structure fills with textural scrawls that cut the sweetness. It’s this, not the messaging, that is worth hanging onto. Way back in the 10-cent bin, between the 40-odd copies of Whipped Cream & Other Delights and those “Sounds of Hawaii” records made exclusively by people who'd never set foot on Hawaii, Monster Rally’s Ted Feighan has found paradise. “Exotica,” we used to call it: “Space-age bachelor pad music,” that sort of thing. Feighan, having lifted dozens of samples from the original, often-warped wax, realigns them into a sparkling, sun-soaked collage, deftly sliding between opulent slack-key guitars, clattering breakbeats, and shimmering tropicalia, like the Avalanches stuck in Honolulu with visa issues, or the Caretaker on daquiri three. Mystery Cove, the fourth Monster Rally full-length, is pure, distilled escapism: 42 straight minutes of somewhere else, no SPF required.Feighan largely works in miniature—few Monster Rally tracks run too far past the two minute mark—without much apparent use for vocals. While early highlight “In the Valleys” lifts a few lines from hapa-haole classic “Lahainaluna,” the paucity of voices throughout the rest of Mystery Cove gives the disc its air of seclusion, a paradise far removed from the madding crowd. From chopped-not-slopped big band ditties (“Moondog”) to swanky hold music/“Hotline Bling” schmaltz (“Full Sail,” “After Hours”) to lusty, Herb Ritts-lensed sandblasters (“Tourismo”), this is transporting work.Mystery Cove isn’t a real place, but Feighan’s fondness for certain sounds (lounge, surf, slack-key guitar) sourced from a certain era (1948-1964, give or take) neatly conjures one anyway: beautiful people, endless beaches, fruit-based cocktails. Alas, like any vacation, Mystery Cove too often cuts things short just when they’re getting good. For all his curatorial prowess, Feighan tends to winnow down his Goodwill findings into 10-or-15 second chunks. There’s plenty of variation between the tracks, just not necessarily much within them; occasionally, a breakbeat is introduced, or a clip will run headlong into another, but the general rule seems to be “cut, spin, fade, repeat.” While that certainly keeps things moving, there’s rarely enough time within individual tracks to get acclimated to the scenery when Feighan’s anxiously clicking his way through the slideshow.As an exercise in vibe-sustainment, Mystery Cove is a knockout. To that end, it’s probably the most cohesive Monster Rally record to date: a Hawaiian shirt with an AUX input. But that cohesion comes comes at the cost of a bit of adventure; whereas 2013’s more baldly experimental Return to Paradise found Feighan drawing slivers of samba and sweeping mid-century soundtrack work into his world party, Mystery Cove rarely makes it too far off the Big Island. Most of us will take our escapism where we can get it nowadays, and Feighan’s only too happy to provide.The 1970s was Steve Reich’s decade; although he had already completed groundbreaking phase pieces It’s Gonna Rain, Come Out, and Violin Phase by the end of the ‘60s, the ten-year run that followed was something else entirely. Starting with Drumming in 1971, moving through the epochal Music for 18 Musicians and passing into the early ’80s with the beautiful Tehillim, Reich married his early structural innovations to a singular, aqueous melodicism that rocketed him out of the downtown NY avant-garde into as close to the mainstream as it is possible for a modern composer to be. Six Pianos—written in between Drumming  and 18 Musicians and released to accompany the show-stealing Music for Mallet Instruments, Voices and Organ—is a solid fan favorite, a lovely piece of music that fits perfectly between the larger, more definitive works. Once you know what to expect from the composer, Reich’s work from this era does exactly what it says on the box: there are six pianos, playing overlapping developments and variations on deceptively simple melodic figures for the piece's duration. Development will happen, but in a such a supple fashion you will be hard pressed to remember what was different between the start of the piece and its conclusion. Everything has shifted, yet nothing has changed.  Something similar can be said for the various recordings of Reich’s work. One sinks into the music so easily that different iterations can seem only incrementally distinct from each other. This new LP issued by Berlin’s FILM Recordings reprises a recent performance by an ensemble featuring, among others, members of chamber-techno upstarts Brandt Brauer Frick and promises “Six Pianos the way it should be looked at in 2016.” To achieve this, each player recorded their individual part alone, in separate studios, later combining the layers into a unified whole. The result offers a distinct perspective on Pianos, though perhaps not an improvement.Reich’s music is quintessentially New York, with precise, percolating rhythms and a subtle melancholy evoking nothing more than the simple pleasures of darting through a hectic Manhattan on a crisp autumn afternoon. Part of the joy of his larger ensemble works is the lush crowding of instruments, with different voices smearing together, suddenly poking out before receding back into the mix. On this recording, however, each line is rendered with stunning clarity and separation. It’s a move that’s in line with the times, with ensembles like So Percussion and Alarm Will Sound offering virtuosic updates of classic pieces, and makes for an intriguing listen. The clockwork qualities of Reich’s music are brought to the front, and you can focus immediately on any part you like, letting the rest move around you. However, some of the richness and emotion that make this work so enduring are dulled in favor of a tidy tastefulness. In their youth, minimalist composers had to fight hard against lazy attempts to classify their work as New Age, and the players here seem determined to emphasize the elemental rigor of the piece. But although Reich was never utopian in his goals, he was also unafraid of drawing human pathos out from his looping melodies.The B-side is a rendition of Terry Riley’s Keyboard Study #1 that goes further in its modern updates. Riley’s original score is written in billowing, hippie chicken scratch and reads more like a brain teaser than a piece of music: “The two kinds of figures interlock and are repeated in this fashion until one of the hands selects another figure… combine any figure from lines 2-6 with continuum figure 1… if any figure from lines 8-10 is played in the alignment of continuum figure 7… it may be combined with other figures from lines 8-10.” And so on. Ensemble member Gregor Schwellenbach performed the piece solo and put together the final mix with assistance from engineer Lukas Vogel, who added delays and reverbs. The work, open to interpretation, here becomes a series of tight, consonant piano runs that double over each other in dizzying spirals. An early work of Riley’s, Study #1 laid the groundwork for his iconic A Rainbow in Curved Air and subsequent masterpieces like Persian Surgery Dervishes. Intuitive, often darkly psychedelic explorations of textures and loops performed during druggy “all night flights,” these pieces presaged techno by over a decade. Now an ensemble with roots in modern club music has returned to the source material, and though you would never confuse this record for a DJ tool, you can hear a familial bond. Back in 1999, Nonesuch released the Reich Remixed compilation, where a splashy array of electronic producers were invited to explore his back catalogue. A case has always been made for Reich’s relationship to minimal dance music, but aside from the obvious use of repetition that both share, I’ve never seen it, and the compilation struck me as a ham-fisted attempt to gussy up his image for a new generation. This LP is something else entirely. As electronic production has become the new normal and generations upon generations of producers continue to stretch the possibilities of dance music, techno has itself become an elder statesman's genre. Festivals like CTM and Unsound have made their name juxtaposing DIY electronics, touring DJs, loner ambient composers and new music ensembles, and left-of-center artists like Andy Stott, Demdike Stare, and Lee Gamble regularly shuttle between the club and the art world. This LP serves as a worthy and timely addition to the composers’ catalogues, but after finishing this version of Six Pianos, I found myself reaching for my beat up copy of Reich’s 1986 re-orchestration for marimbas. And when it was done, I reached for it again. Justice’s 2007 debut album, †, was expertly engineered for breakthrough success, delivering massive hooks with all the subtlety of a jackhammer. That said, they also had an impeccable sense of timing. Shortly after reigniting public interest in their catalog with the landmark Alive 2007 tour, Daft Punk—Justice’s direct antecedents—largely powered down until the release of 2013’s Random Access Memories. It’s difficult to overstate how much Justice benefitted from this timing, riding a renewed wave of interest in French house just as it was cresting, then stepping into a world hungry for Daft Punk as their closest analogues: two enigmatic French dudes forcing electro-disco through the sieve of hard rock dynamics. They certainly made the most of the opportunity on the live circuit, with ear-splitting arena tours that predicted the rise of pyrotechnic technicians like Skrillex and Deadmau5. Still, for all their success, Justice always felt like Daft Punk’s understudies: cruder, grimier, more willing to dredge rock’s cheesiest depths in search of a big hook.That formula worked well in 2007 but now that Daft Punk is active and operating at pop’s highest echelons, does the world still need Justice? That’s the question the scruffy duo have been attempting to answer ever since. To their credit, they’ve hardly stood still: 2011’s Audio, Video, Disco found the act taking a hard left turn toward prog in order to distinguish themselves. Woman, their  latest, marks yet another tonal shift away from the leather-clad sonics of their debut and toward the brighter sounds of pop and disco.They’ve stored away the crates of vinyl once and for all, padding out their synthcraft with live instrumentation and vocalists. As with previous Justice albums, Woman is full of earnest vocals, rubber-band basslines and weepy strings, only this time everything sounds much warmer and looser. Intentional or not, it’s hard not to see the parallels to Random Access Memories’ pop classicism and militantly analog approach. Just as Daft Punk did, Justice attempt to envelop the sounds of disco and funk in a full on, unironic embrace. And while they remain more willing to violate the rules of good taste (as always, all the faders are at 10 and they continue cramming everything into the midrange), Woman still feels about as “electronic” as RAM does: it largely scans as AM pop, just with more modular synths.Justice being Justice, they can’t resist trying to land a few big singles and these songs tend to be the least adventurous on the album. “Safe and Sound” and “Stop” both attempt to recreate the winning formula of “D.A.N.C.E.”: stargazing choirs, layers of synths, a generous helping of slap bass. At best though, these songs feel like paint-by-numbers versions of Justice’s early singles. In between these throwbacks, we get a lot of middle-of-the-road pop: generically funky melodies, cheesy guitar solos, forgettable vocals, lyrics that are downright embarrassing. It’s not quite offensive but that’s also kind of the problem—much of Woman sounds like music designed by committee, better suited to soundtrack a car commercial than to actively engage the listener (incidentally, Justice do have a pretty strong track record when it comes to landing commercial and video game placements).There are a few moments on Woman where Justice break from the script and most of them are far more memorable than the rest of the record. “Chorus” opens up with drone-y blasts of static that pop up again in the track’s airy back half. “Heavy Metal” kicks off with an Iron Butterfly meets Van Halen organ solo before segueing into a disjointed chorus that recalls Ed Banger’s heyday. “Alakazam !” goes all in on the record’s guiding sound: it’s a straight up four-on-the-floor disco number grafted on to the sort of grungy synth bassline that these guys wield so well. If you’re going to embrace corniness, why not really go for it?While it’s hard to fault them for wanting to explore new terrain, as with Audio, Video, Disco, Woman’s focus largely plays against the pair’s strengths as songwriters. There’s a restraint on display that, coming from Justice, feels more like a lack of commitment. Is Woman more subtle and loosely composed than their previous records? Sure. Are those qualities desirable in a Justice album? Perhaps not. Ever since their emergence, electronic traditionalists have been wringing their hands over these guys but until now there was at least one thing you could never accuse Justice of being: boring.For the first few years of their career, Demdike Stare narrowed in on their chosen aesthetic with unswerving focus. They took their name from a 17th-century witch; they favored titles like “Suspicious Drone” and “All Hallows Eve” and “Forest of Evil (Dusk).” Drawing from horror soundtracks, Italian library music, African percussion records, and industrial acts like Nurse With Wound, they boiled down the mixture until it resembled the sticky black substance scraped from the bottom of an iron cauldron. At the same time, the proportions of their music sprawled, and they turned to increasingly ambitious formats—triple CDs, quadruple LPs—to suit their meandering, multi-part ambient suites.In 2013, the duo turned from their habitual style to indulge themselves with a pair of gut-punching club tunes. Called simply Testpressing #001, the record was named in homage to the white-label platters used to check for errors in the vinyl manufacturing process, but the title also spoke to the tracks’ exploratory purpose: What would happen if they applied their doomy aesthetic to classic jungle and techno? (Total dancefloor mayhem, as it turned out.) Pursuing a grab-bag approach and pairing radically different tracks on each successive 12”, they kept the Testpressing series going for six more installments—only Demdike Stare would approach even one-offs in serial fashion—and although the music varied widely, from UK garage to chopped-and-screwed breakbeat hardcore, the records all shared the same questing nature.Their new album, Wonderland, keeps up those beat-oriented experiments. Nearly all of its tracks are built around muscular rhythms: hardcore breaks, lurching dancehall cadences, overdriven techno. And despite the omnipresent shadowy hues and sandblasted textures, no two tunes sound alike; the eight full-length tracks here (the ninth is a minute-long ambient sketch) could easily have served as the next four records in the Testpressing series. That’s not to say that Wonderland sounds disjointed. Quite to the contrary: As wonderfully immersive as their first couple of albums could be, the new one makes for a far more engaging listening experience, one that shakes you forcefully by the lapels at regular intervals. Where the Testpressing records were noxious and smoggy, so thick with static you could barely breathe, the new album frequently takes inspiration from dancehall reggae’s use of empty space. “Animal Style” loops breakbeats into a snapping groove that feels like a reggae 45 spun at 33, and “FullEdge (eMpTy-40 Mix)” goes so far as to sample “Now Thing,” a 1998 Sly & Lenky riddim that became the centerpiece of an eponymous Mo Wax compilation of dancehall instrumentals. (It’s clearly a sound close to their hearts: Earlier this year, Demdike Stare’s DDS label released Equiknoxx’s Bird Sound Power, an album by a group of Jamaican producers deeply inspired by the kind of digital dancehall that Now Thing spotlighted.)There are moments of real beauty, like the flickering loop of tone that sends the final track, “Overstaying,” soaring toward its 808-driven climax. But the musicians aren’t afraid to get messy, either. In “Sourcer,” a ragged ragga-jungle anthem, dubbed-out synths bob like fat globules in soapy water; “Hardnoise” delivers exactly what the title promises, at least until a trim 808 pattern ushers its metal-shop squeals toward a comparatively dulcet ambient close. Something that elevates Wonderland above reams of color-by-numbers “dark” techno is Demdike Stare’s judicious sense of dynamics; the duo also clearly have a wicked sense of humor. They’re fond of fake-out beats that hiccup, stumble, and flip into totally different time signatures, and the switchbacking changes of “FullEdge (eMpTy-40 Mix)” suggest a preference for hands-on recording and white-knuckled mixdowns, as opposed to meticulous, on-screen composition. The end of the song dissolves into a monstrous bit of noise, followed by a sharp guffaw from one of the musicians; suddenly, we’re eavesdropping on the duo in their studio. “Amazing,” says the other, clearly pleased with the madness they’ve cooked up.My favorite moment on the album might be the spoken-word snippet that closes out the woozy synth sketch “Fridge Challenge.” It’s just a loudspeaker announcement inside an airport terminal—“TAP Flight 3814 to Brasilia now boarding gate 28”—but the announcer’s voice is so full of character, her diction so alien, that within the context of the album, it takes on a weird, almost paranormal resonance. You can imagine the two musicians staring slack-jawed at each other as they pulled out their phones to record the sound, marveling at what they’d stumbled upon. To make mood music out of already gloomy materials is easy; on Wonderland, Demdike Stare spin the most unexpected stuff into music for haunted dancehalls, and the results are wickedly compelling.It’s been a few years since Matmos’ label Vague Terrain released a piece of new music, and for the most part Drew Daniel and M.C. Schmidt have called the organization a “vanity label” to release their own work and play around. In 2002, they even used Vague Terrain as a pseudonym to record the soundtrack for a fetish-heavy pornographic film. “Every so often we hear something completely gobsmacking and feel that we MUST share it with the world,” the pair wrote on their website to suddenly announce the revival of their label.The project that so shocked them is the debut album of Bully Fae, a queer Los-Angeles based multimedia artist. Defy a Thing to Be is the artist’s first formal release, but they (Fae prefers not to be gendered) have been sharing performance pieces  and fragments of the album, which mixes rapping, stand-up comedy, abstracted spoken word, and goofy (but highly effective) dancing into a hilarious and fascinating whole. Fae work has been described as the middle of a “Bermuda Triangle” that includes three artistic forebears: Nicki Minaj, the video artist Ryan Trecartin, and the poet Ariana Reines. Meaning, the work they make is colorful, fueled by amphetamines and raunchy, but highly theoretical, and very interested in the body and identity. Defy a Thing to Be is a short, acerbic, and often very funny album that only spans 22 minutes over 9 tracks. It lives in this intersection of experimental dance music and hip hop, one that recalls the work of artists like Yves Tumor, Nguzunguzu (and the Night Slugs/Fade to Mind crew at large), Lotic, and queer rappers like Le1f. Although, unlike any of these artists, Fae’s work is much more invested—often to its own detriment—in heady and restricted kinds of experimentation. The lyrics attempt to explore a broad and almost overwhelming number of subjects. The writing can be very serious and probing: “Hack up the program hosting us/Addicted to systems.../You could say I’m addicted/But how do we define addiction,” but also grotesquely humorous: “Bossy but a bottom at best I wish.” On the level of Fae’s writing alone, there is a sly and investigative quality that can’t be imitated. Yet, their voice will definitely be polarizing for many listeners. It can be piercing or cartoonish, and it is often garbled by digital effects, but there is no avoiding the fact that a needling voice can be a bad messenger for such dense thinking. Even if unintended, Fae’s sometimes erratic flow can make the expression of their ideas clunky and forced. Often, the album’s saving grace is clever, subtle, and fluid production across the nine tracks. Fae’s beats are often vaporous, foreboding, and almost dystopian, cloaking their voice with a razor’s edge that makes up for any vocal shortcomings. Take for example songs like “Elevator Pitch (lasséz-fairy forecast),” where Fae attempts to critically frame this corporate experience with a queer sensibility. Lines like, “Picture us online/All accounts entwined” or “Like a verb man can I heard your a word man” don’t sound disjointed or so random, because Fae is able to create a sonic space that is dimly lit and uncomfortable and unpredictable. In the music video for the song, it becomes profoundly weird, which depicts Fae cavorting around an empty office in a shabby suit. Perhaps the biggest shortcoming of Defy a Thing to Be is that it just seems better suited for the stage or for visual consumption. Part of Fae’s theory of performance is based upon a kind of focused randomness that can be lost with the album form. Watching videos of Fae perform show that their ideas simultaneously focus and loosen in the context of actual performance. The critical aspect of Fae’s work seems to go missing when experienced only in your headphones. Similar to the artist working in the NON collective, Fae works to implicate an audience, but it requires a dance floor and willing group to generate this ideal experience. Fae almost proves Peggy Phelan's idea that performance can only exist in the present, and that documentation and records of it are profoundly different. As an act of artistic subversion, Defy a Thing to Be hits the mark with its level of thinking, but misses a key element of physicality that would make it something special. On their new full-length L.A. Heartbreak, the electro-punk duo Rainbow Arabia (married couple Tiffany and Danny Preston) has evolved into a full-fledged mainstream pop act. The tropical polyrhythms of their earliest works are sublimated into post-Moroder synth vamps, and  a newfound sense of balance and a lighter touch have clicked into compositions of unexpected sophistication. In one sense, this is a logical progression from their 2008 debut EP Basta through 2013’s FM Sushi, as the brightly colored and self-consciously “exotic” influences of North African and “other” pop musics have gradually becomes subtler and more balanced. But even in the album’s most satisfying moments, it’s impossible not to feel that there is something missing.To pin down exactly what that missing element is, it’s necessary to untwine—or maybe re-entangle—the polar elements of Rainbow Arabia’s sound; big percussion grooves and brassy microtonal synths on the one hand (think Sublime Frequencies) and wistful, distant vocals and subtler arrangements on the other (think Tangerine Dream, Kraftwerk, New Order) on the other. These two ideas are not so different:  Even at their most exploratory, Rainbow Arabia have always been heirs of a sort to new wave and ’80s synthpop. Their aesthetic could be described as Berlin or Missing Persons for a generation that has swapped out MTV for YouTube vids of Vybz Kartel and kuduro.On L.A. Heartbreak, one gets the sense that Preston & Preston are less likely to spend their time daydreaming with a store-bought fluorescent light and more likely to address their issues like grown-ups. The trippy and exotic elements are still there—just toned down and incorporated into something that feels more like everyday life. “Followed” comes on like “Just Can’t Get Enough”-era Depeche Mode before shifting into more soaring sadness. “Top Hat” takes three of it’s four minutes to morph into a slow acid house track worthy of Mr. Fingers. But the various elements feel most cohesive on the lead single “Plena.” A slow reggaeton pulse is augmented by scintillating synth-work that suggests sunlight sparkling off water, as Tiffany intones “Take me on a holiday...I am so in love with you/Tell me what you wanna do” in a voice so plaintive it’s easy to read as “I am so alone with you.” A new listener might rightly wonder if this was the new Gwen Stefani song or maybe another EDM-pop prodigy a la the Chainsmokers (if that sounds backhanded, it’s not—pop this effortless is rare and never as easy to make as it is to listen to).Over the LP as a whole, though, this more anonymous, disaffected sound leaves the topography of Rainbow Arabia a bit flat, sometimes (as on “Modern Contemporary” and “Mixolydian”) feeling like Afrobeat without any of the urgency or joy. The duo’s songwriting has grown stronger, and their arrangements more subtle. Even the record's honest disaffection feels in some ways more authentic than their erstwhile experiments in “world” sounds. But those forays, even when they were clunky or unfortunate, also brought a sense of play and provocation that is missing here. Now that they’ve landed back on Earth, maybe next time they can bring some of their wilder, more colorful dreams back with them.Kate Bush always exploited technological advancement. In 1979, from just coathangers and Blu-Tack, the trailblazing British pop auteur pioneered the head mic for her vanguard Tour of Life. Her subsequent albums made her one of the earliest adopters of the Fairlight synthesizer that would define the ’80s. Before the Dawn, then, is a surprising throwback: the unexpurgated live album, a document of her 2014 live shows, her first in 35 years. There are no retakes or overdubs bar a few atmospheric FX. No apps, no virtual reality, no interactivity. She’s also said there won’t be a DVD, which is surprising given the show’s spectacular theatrics, conceived by the former artistic director of the Royal Shakespeare Company and a host of designers, puppeteers, and illusionists. The show, and this release, aren’t credited to Kate Bush but the KT Fellowship, in recognition of the vast ensemble effort. Yet in shucking off half the production, this hefty 155-minute, three-disc set (one per “act”) is also the best way that Before the Dawn could have been preserved, allowing it to tell its own story uninhibited by the busy staging.I went to a show towards the end of the 22-date run, and was overwhelmed by how physically moving it was to see Bush in real life, since for most of mine she’s only existed in videos and BBC clip-show documentaries. The staging didn’t always have the same impact. The sublime Act One, as close to a greatest hits as we got, was stripped back—just Bush at the piano backed by her crack band.In Act Two, Bush realized her long-held desire to dramatize “The Ninth Wave,” the conceptual B-side of 1985’s Hounds of Love, which documents a woman’s dark night of the soul as she fights for life while lost at sea. While her “husband” and real-life son Bertie McIntosh blithely carried on with domestic life inside a tiny, sloping living room set, a video depicted Bush stranded in dark, choppy waters (now released as the “And Dream of Sheep” video). Moments later, the real Bush reappeared on stage to fight sinister “fish people” who carried her body off through the aisles. The whirring blades and desperate search lights of a rescue helicopter descended from the Hammersmith Apollo’s ceiling, illuminating and buffeting the crowd. Despite some hammy dialogue, it was staggering, and in sharp contrast to Act Three, which focused on Aerial’s second side, “A Sky of Honey.” McIntosh played a landscape painter from ye olden times while a life-size marionette of a jointed-doll simpered around the stage, embracing Bush, who looked on in raptures. At 75 minutes long, it was a sickly, trying accompaniment to one of the subtler achievements in her catalogue.With the visuals stripped away, some confusing vestiges of the live show remain on the record—mostly the stilted dialogue (McIntosh’s lines as the painter are cringeworthy). But otherwise it flows remarkably well: the prog grooves and piano ballads of the first act setting up the gothic tumult of “The Ninth Wave,” which comes down into the sun-dappled ambience of “A Sky of Honey.” The sound is rich and warm, but rough, too: imperfectly mic’d and properly live-sounding. The arrangements are largely faithful, even down to the synth presets, though sometimes the veteran session musicians form an overwhelming battalion. “Lily” comes out sounding a bit like Christian goth rock, and “King of the Mountain” is a victim of breadth over depth, its dynamics drowned out by every band member playing at once. It’s a shame that the terror of “Hounds of Love” gets swapped for sentimental optimism, but the band recreate that album’s second half to sound as avant-garde and bracing as any current young outsider.Live albums are meant to capture performers at their rawest and least inhibited, which doesn’t really apply to Before the Dawn. Bush is a noted perfectionist best known for her synthesizer experiments and love of obscure Bulgarian choirs, but her recent work has skewed towards traditional setups that reunite her with the prog community that fostered her early career. With marks to hit and tableaux to paint, the 2014 shows were more War of the Worlds (or an extension of 2011’s Director’s Cut) than Live at Leeds. But never mind balls-out revamps of Bush’s best known songs; with the exception of tracks from Hounds of Love, none of the rest of the setlist had ever been done live—not even on TV, which became Bush’s primary stage after she initially retired from touring. These songs weren’t written to be performed, but internalized. Occupying Bush’s imagination for an hour, and letting it fuse with your own, formed the entirety of the experience. Hearing this aspic-preserved material come to life feels like going to sleep and waking up decades later to see how the world has changed.“Jig of Life” is the midpoint of Before the Dawn, and its crux. It forms the part in “The Ninth Wave” where Bush’s character is exhausted of fighting against drowning, and decides to succumb to death. A vision of her future self appears, and convinces her to stay alive. “Now is the place where the crossroads meet,” she chants, just as her (then) 56-year-old voice channels her 27-year-old one. Despite her alleged taste for burning one, Bush’s voice has gained in power rather than faded with age. It’s deeper now, and some of the songs’ keys shift to match, but it’s alive and incalculably moving, still capable of agile whoops and tender eroticism, and possesses a newfound authority. When she roars lustily through opener “Lily” and its declaration that “life has blown a great big hole through me,” she sets up the stakes of Before the Dawn’s quest for peace. In Act One, she’s running from the prospect of love on “Hounds of Love” and “Never Be Mine,” and from fame on “King of the Mountain,” where she searches for Elvis with sensual anticipation. She asks for Joan of Arc’s protection on “Joanni,” matching the French visionary’s fearlessness with her own funky diva roar, and sounds as if she could raze the world as she looks down from “Top of the City.”Rather than deliver a copper-bottomed greatest hits set, Bush reckons with her legacy through what might initially seem like an obscure choice of material. Both Acts Two and Three take place in transcendent thresholds: “The Ninth Wave”’s drowning woman is beset by anxiety and untold pressures, with no idea of where to turn, mirroring the limbo that Bush experienced after 1982’s The Dreaming. That suite’s last song, the cheery “The Morning Fog,” transitions into Aerial’s “Prelude,” all beatific bird call and dawn-light piano. The euphoric, tender “A Sky of Honey” is meant to represent a perfect day from start to finish, filled with family and beautiful imperfections. “Somewhere in Between” finds them atop “the highest hill,” looking out onto a stilling view, and Bush’s eerie jazz ensemble anticipates the liminal peace of Bowie’s Blackstar. “Not one of us would dare to break the silence,” she sings. “Oh how we have longed for something that would make us feel so… somewhere in between.”Purgatory has become heaven, and in the narrative Bush constructs through her setlist, “A Sky of Honey” represents the grown-up, domestic happiness that staves off the youthful fears explored on Hounds of Love. For her final song, she closes with a rendition of “Cloudbusting,” a song about living with the memory of a forbidden love, which is even more glorious for all the hope that it’s accumulated in the past 30-odd years. Bush’s recent life as a “reclusive” mother is often used to undermine her, to “prove” she was the kook that sexist critics had pegged her as all along. These performances and this record are a generous reveal of why she’s chosen to retreat, where Bush shows she won’t disturb her hard-won peace to sustain the myth of the troubled artistic genius. Between the dangerous waters of “The Ninth Wave” and the celestial heavens of “A Sky of Honey,” Before the Dawn demystifies what we’ve fetishized in her absence. Without draining her magic, it lets Bush exist back down on Earth.E-40 only released one project in 2015—unusual by the prolific rapper's standards. After dropping nothing but double and triple albums on an annual basis since 2010, a 7-song EP felt might’ve felt scant in comparison to the tomes to which we had grown accustomed to receiving; instead, the succinctness of Poverty and Prosperity felt like fresh air rushing into a cellar that hadn’t been opened in decades. But a fundamental shift in the Bay Area legend’s approach to disseminating his music the EP was not. With The D-Boy Diary: Books 1 and 2, E-40 returns to the firehose method that over the past six years has become his default mode. Except this time around there’s an increasing sense that he’s beginning to repeat himself.The most obvious example: “Uh Huh” is a shameless retread of E-40’s own “Choices (Yup),” the now gold-certified track from 2014’s Sharp on All 4 Corners. It uses the same call-and-response format, except it swaps out “Yup” and “Nope” for the nearly synonymous “Uh huh” and “Mm mm.” Even its beat is a simulacrum of its predecessor’s eerie slink, only less eerie and less slinky. Of course, being as inventive a rapper as he is, E-40 still manages to cram “Uh Huh” with novel swaths of wordplay: “Your paper shorter than a fake smile (Mm mm!)/My paper longer than a murder trial (Uh huh!).” It’s not the only instance of déjà vu—many of the double album’s 44 tracks feature production that recalls earlier E-40 material in broad strokes if not exact configurations: squelchy synths, block-shaped percussion, and an endless buoyancy.Which isn’t to say that any of these beats are bad; there’s nary a dud in the entire batch, but they do feel slightly less imaginative than they have in the past. The sheer amount of music on most E-40 projects can amplify this issue—when the beats are as homogeneous as they are here, even the slightest dip in quality will produce uneventful stretches. For every “Hunedz,” whose hydraulic bounce comes courtesy of hyphy pioneer Rick Rock, there’s a “Bag on Me,” which hits all the required marks but not particularly enthusiastically, or boilerplate hyphy like “The Grit Don’t Quit.” All of E-40’s usual in-house collaborators are here: from his son Droop-E—whose three contributions are all highlights, the inside-out lurch of “Goon Music” standing tallest—to fellow Californian DecadeZ, all the producers enlisted deliver beats that range from guaranteed function-starters to merely functional.As with most of the E-40’s gargantuan projects, the moments that fall furthest from the mean stylistically tend to be found towards the tail-end of each volume. Book 1’s “Check” is a collaboration with Zaytoven, and the Atlanta producer known best for his work with the likes of Gucci Mane and Future serves up one of his iciest tracks in recent memory, full of slow-rolling menace and verging-on-EDM wubs. “2 Seater,” from Book 2, is the most conspicuously anomalous beat on the whole project. Nard N B bring a pop sensibility to the Kid Ink-featuring love song, and E-40 brags about how for a special night out with his girl he “booked this room on Hotels.com.” The track’s low-friction glide sets it apart from the rest of the album’s bottom-heavy focus, but it suits E-40, a rapper who has always had a strong ear for beats.It helps that even though the production sometimes leans run-of-the-mill, E-40 remains as enamored as ever with the physical act of rapping. Nowhere does he sound more energized than on “I Had It in a Drought,” a joyous back-in-the-day reminiscence that naturally doubles as a brag session. The main character of the song, however, is not E-40 himself but rather the Bay Area itself: “On Solano Avenue, I bought a clothing store/In Vallejo, California: entrepreneur/Next to Davenport, Elite Check Cashing store/Across the street from Church's Chicken, it was on/A couple of doors down, Studio Ton.” His lyrics are so hyper-specific that you can find the actual street view using Google Maps. And on an album where his rubber-ball cadence belies his age (49!), it’s no surprise that he sounds most youthful rapping about his second favorite topic (after E-40): his hometown.Straight thoughts delivered with zig-zagging technique: this has always been E-40’s formula. It sounds simple; in reality, it’s anything but. His rapping style—all over the beat without being bucked off, simultaneously pushing and pulling in all directions—is one that few if any try to approximate at all, let alone lift wholesale. It’s so inextricably linked with him that it would sound alien coming from anyone else. And the rub is he makes it sound as natural as breathing. “I’m a master of reality/Rap about good times and casualties” he raps on “Blessed By the Game.” There’s always been an underlying current of civic duty in his music, an unquenchable need to document the events around him for the benefit of future generations—and this one, too. The D-Boy Diary is just further proof that as long as he’s alive, E-40 won’t stop.Over her half-century career as a composer and singer, Meredith Monk has refreshed the language of vocal music. She has cultivated steely modes of expression in her top register, and gravely dramatic timbres in the low end. In between those extremes, she possesses a library of stunning, diverse effects that come across as intensely physical. On a recording, Monk’s voice doesn’t enter the listener’s consciousness from some disembodied ether. The music sails directly from the discrete figure at its center.The pressed-lip vibrations, throat clicks and beaming yowls of childhood play are celebrated in her singing. And these tricks are also put to use for emotionally varied ends. A tender lullaby might veer into a cathartic silliness. A pulse-driven group chant can collapse into solemn observance. Patterns are present, though mostly for the purpose of being challenged by an unlikely development.Occasionally she uses short English phrases to anchor a theme. More often, the vocal production is wordless—though it is no less communicative for that fact. The influence of this style is felt both inside and outside the academy. When listening to Björk, Joanna Newsom, or Kate Soper, you’re dealing with a tradition that stretches back through Monk, who has studied classical and folk forms and found luminous ways to channel them. On Behalf of Nature is titled after one of Monk’s recent, wordless stage shows: a meditation on ecological themes, including climate change. Despite that impassioned editorial focus, her resulting suite of songs and motifs avoids coming across like a lecture. And because she always revises the music from a dramatic piece before creating an album, Nature sounds purposeful and complete throughout its hourlong running time. Aside from her vocal troupe, the instrumental forces include ace percussionist John Hollenbeck, harpist Laura Sherman, and the reed-instrument player Bohdan Hilash. (One current singer in Monk’s group, Allison Sniffin, also doubles on piano, violin and French horn.)With a spare introductory theme voiced on a Burmese piccolo, opening track “Dark/Light 1” evokes a pre-dawn zone of austere beauty. Later, a brooding bass clarinet is stalked calmly by a vibraphone tones. Then Monk’s voice enters, creating a sense of shamanistic ritual. Her notes could be talismans against danger, or the first melody after a cataclysmic event. Gradually, her sound gives way to that of a male voice, for a short stretch, before the the full vocal ensemble enters with gleaming new harmonies. In moving from a vulnerable, solo state to a zone of greater security and community, the music etches its broad narrative.Throughout Nature, the composer’s graceful use of diverse sonic phenomena amounts to a plea for biodiversity. This argument works via metaphor, instead of through the language of the stump speech. Rich rounds of vocal writing suggest organic growth processes, on “Fractal Activity.” The murmurs of “Environs 1” sound like the byproduct of a busy hive. Then there are the serene glances at beauty, as in the clarinet, vibraphone and French horn feature “Eon.” And you can understand why Monk rejects the “minimalist” label during a movement like “Duet with Shifting Ground”—where blocks of seemingly stable harmony are interrupted by prickly parts for violin and percussion.Surprises keep coming, without ruining the charming underlying vibe. Strange string lines sneak up on the vocalists, during the otherwise imperturbable “Evolution.” Unexpected rhythmic stresses make “Pavement Steps” into an unlikely dance number. Occasionally, Monk’s hooks seem to be present merely so that they can be upended. But thanks to the palindrome-like “arch form” of the piece, all these feints and stylistic burrows eventually feel unified, when early motifs reappear in slightly adapted form, toward the close of the piece. At 74, Monk’s voice doesn’t have quite the otherworldly pliability captured on vintage recordings like Do You Be. Yet she is utterly commanding during this album’s centerpiece, “Water/Sky Rant.” Here, Monk inhabits the role of a woman petitioning the heavens for a downpour. Harp arpeggios support the initial entreaties; an optimistic clarinet tries to help make the sale. Then, a shift in the harmony shows us that the sky is still parched. Monk’s voice momentarily sounds defeated, tinny. Then she unleashes a show-stopping “rant,” full of the desperate, throaty extended-techniques that this singer has been pioneering ever since Julius Eastman was a member of her vocal ensemble. Of late, Monk has started receiving more invitations to write for orchestras and string quartets. In her liner notes to Nature, it is acknowledged that “the voices and instruments have equal weight” this time—a state of play that might startle those who think of her talent in narrower terms. Still, she’s always been more than one of the world’s great singers. Some of Monk’s best pieces, like the 1991 opera Atlas, have also boasted dazzling instrumental writing. Her vocal instrument remains the envy of singers fifty years her junior. But on Nature, the uniqueness of her compositional vision is just as impressive.The last track on Pavo Pavo's debut album, Young Narrator in the Breakers, is called “2020, We'll Have Nothing Going On,” which seems strikingly ominous now given the state of current American politics. However, the Brooklyn-based five-piece consider themselves optimists—a fact mirrored in their music and their aesthetic. The album's artwork features two women holding hands, walking into a metallic horizon like a 1950s advertisement, and this type of imagery informs the album. Young Narrator in the Breakers sounds like a ’70s soft-rock dispatch from what people in the mid-20th century thought the future would be like: jetpacks, Mars landings, and dehydrated Thanksgiving dinners. Their music embraces space-age retro-futurism, but with some gentle touches from the last 10 years of indie rock (Fleet Foxes' angelic harmonies; Grizzly Bear's urban folk; Arcade Fire's wide-eyed chamber pop) to keep them from being stuck in nostalgic pastiche. All five members of Pavo Pavo are classically trained musicians as well as songwriters—and instead of seeming like disparate entities all vying for your attention, each person contributes just enough in their respective area that every drum fill, handclap and keyboard stab falls perfectly into place. “Time is a hole in my waterbed,” sings vocalist/keyboardist Eliza Bagg in her soothing soprano on the album opener “Ran Ran Run,” exactly the sort of softly loopy line that gives Pavo Pavo their off-beat color. As the chorus kicks in, the song shifts gears from downtempo to upbeat, jaunty pop, illustrating the band's knack for unconventional arrangements, another factor that keeps their somewhat typical setup from falling into conventionality. It seems that 2016 had brought on a miniature, unexpected ’70s soft-rock revival (think the Lemon Twigs' mellow glam or Drugdealer's woozy folk). Down to their soft focus press photos in color-coordinated turtlenecks, this is a style Pavo Pavo make no qualms about embracing, and “Wiserway,” another highlight, is the closest they get to realizing it. Supported by off-kilter synthesizers that plod along like the theme to a forgotten after-school special, vocalist/guitarist Oliver Hill's voice, somewhere between a confession and plea, coasts effortlessly across his bandmates' three-part harmonies. Pavo Pavo may have formed in Brooklyn, but everything about this song conjures up images of Laurel Canyon, midnight beach bonfires and lazy coastal car rides.  The album is not without the occasional misstep: The title track interlude is a one-minute-long burst of space rock that aches to be given a full song treatment. But more often than not, Pavo Pavo redress those imperfections within a matter of seconds—“No Mind,” an uptempo number that at times sounds like Mark Mothersbaugh fronting the Flaming Lips, glues the second half of the album together, and “John (a Little Time)” makes the best use of Bagg's haunting vocals in a whisper of a ballad, like a lovelorn alien reaching out from the farthest reaches of the galaxy. By the time you do finally reach the closing sigh of “2020, We'll Have Nothing Going On,” the song's driving, mid-era Beach Boys wish to “Take me to the country/Seriously, Christine” does begin to feel like a promise of a better tomorrow, building a rocket to the future with childlike wonder. Whatever the actual year 2020 will hold, for now, Pavo Pavo's escapism feels cozy, uplifting, and wholly appropriate. In the constellation of small clubs, one-off dancefloors, disused industrial structures, abandoned basements, strange apartments, and wonderfully forlorn spaces that compose and incubate the New York dance scene in the last half-decade, Dylan Scheer, who DJs and produces as Via App, has emerged as one of the city’s most prodigious talents. If you’ve seen her behind the ones and twos at, say, Bossa Nova Civic Club in Brooklyn or Trans-Pecos in Queens, you’ll notice immediately that she prefers caustic and uncomfortable music, and her style is defined by a jitter and mercurial mixing that delightfully defies the streamlined logic of by-the-book techno. It’s the kind of DJing that befits the protean and defiant nature of New York’s dance scene. On her third studio album, Sixth Stitch, Scheer presents an ominous and decidedly gothic vision of club music.Sixth Stitch is composed of 16 tracks, divided between a series of short interstitial instrumental sketches and more “traditional” dance songs. On her past releases, Scheer made tunes that existed outside of genre, tracks that could be playful and angry, filled with crunching noises and slippery bass lines. Her production was as unexpected as it was seemingly unfocused. Now, she shows a tighter vision, a sharpened sense of what she wants her music to do. Across the music on Sixth Stitch, she creates a creeping tactile sensation that generates a sordid sense of time and place. It is music that imagines the parts of a club that reside behind closed doors and shadowy corners.In the album’s opening track “Far She,” Scheer lays out the newfound physicality of her music. The piece is haunted by a churning drone that sounds like a malfunctioning white noise machine or a broken appliance. After the noise has become somewhat hypnotizing, Scheer inverts the mood and introduces a percussive element that mimics the sound and feeling of someone banging on a closed door. Seconds later, there is more banging, as if a crowd is forming outside your bedroom. If you’re listening to this on headphones, alone in your apartment, her mix of sounds generates a distinct feeling of horror.It’s not as if her music is totally predicated on discomfort, but she deploys a series of anxious and claustrophobic moments to make this album’s joyful moments even more pronounced and triumphant. In tracks like “Get in Line” she uses a gurgling collection of noise that’s drippy, wet, and muffled. When percussion starts to stabilize and she adds in a loop of sharp synths, it’s a pure relief, as if you’ve climbed out of a manhole to see the rest of the world. After minutes of nervousness tracks can become downright goofy, and the release of energy is potent.Elsewhere, Scheer experiments with more cinematic sounds that seem to borrow from Flying Lotus or John Carpenter. In “Viasabel,” she loops a glittering array of keyboard flicks into something that could easily soundtrack a scene in a galactic cantina on a backwater planet. “Con Artist” presents a back-breaking version of jungle that would  be appropriate for the rave scene in the second Matrix movie. As daring as Scheer’s selection of sounds are, the sheer length of the album leads to long sections that seem shapeless or mired by wasted space. In songs like “Phantom Dictation,” about two minutes are spent playing around with all the different ways you could pass a simple drumline through a helium filter, and the momentum disappears.Still, Sixth Stitch is a bit of a daredevil feat for this young producer. Few have her ability to turn bedlam into such an organized and effective music. Scheer has said in the past that she looks to DJs like Ashland Mines (aka Total Freedom) as aesthetic forebears. Arca once said that Mines was the “king of painting through chaos.” Scheer seems to be angling for a title of her own. Ice Cube left N.W.A. in late 1989 over a royalty dispute, a fairly mundane conclusion to his tenure as the intellectual force and chief lyricist for the self-proclaimed “World’s Most Dangerous Group” after only one proper album. Cube’s lyrics for “Fuck the Police” had triggered an F.B.I. response earlier that same year, but Cube was still living at home with his parents when Straight Outta Compton was rocketing toward platinum status. He was 20 years old, and he’d just turned down a $75,000 check because he didn’t trust Eazy-E and Jerry Heller, who ran the group’s label, Ruthless Records. Two years later, with the release of Death Certificate, he’d be the biggest and most controversial rapper in the world.  During the two years between Cube’s split in late 1989 and the release of Death Certificate, his sprawling, imperfect magnum opus in late 1991, rap music grew up in a hurry, experiencing its pop and punk moments simultaneously. Crossover acts like L.L. Cool J, M.C. Hammer, Vanilla Ice, Kid ‘N Play, DJ Jazzy Jeff and the Fresh Prince, and Digital Underground took rap to the top of the charts and into the heart of suburban multiplexes, while southern California gangsta rap continued to proliferate in N.W.A.’s wake via Above the Law, Compton’s Most Wanted and Cypress Hill. On the East Coast, Public Enemy’s Black Nationalist oratory and incisive media critiques, which inspired Straight Outta Compton, continued on 1990’s Fear of a Black Planet. The Geto Boys took their nightmarish vision of Houston’s Fifth Ward to the Hot 100 singles chart while Miami’s 2 Live Crew emerged as unlikely First Amendment pioneers, and regional rap scenes took shape around the country.As rap continued to evolve and mutate during this two-year period, forces both internal and external worked to validate it as a cultural and economic power. By 1991, the quickly industrializing genre had spawned its own house organ, as The Source—the first magazine to cover rap in its fans’ vernacular, and a central node linking the disparate nationwide phenomenon together—was bringing in seven-figure ad revenues after moving to New York City from Boston in 1990. In March 1991, rap was legitimized in a different(and perhaps more significant) way: Billboard unveiled a radical (and long-overdue) change to its chart methodology. Instead of relying on self-reported sales numbers from retailers—which ignored many independent and “urban” outlets—the new SoundScan system used actual bar code data to determine sales. The impact for rap was felt immediately: N.W.A.’s independently-distributed Efil4zaggin debuted at #2 on the Billboard Top 200 chart behind Paula Abdul’s Spellbound, before climbing to the top spot in its second week. Six months later, Death Certificate, on which Priority spent $18,000 in marketing and which enjoyed no Top 40 airplay, outsold Hammer’s fourth album Too Legit to Quit (which Capitol spent a million dollars promoting) in both LPs’ first weeks in stores. Gangsta rap had won. Death Certificate is not Cube’s best album. May 1990’s Amerikkka’s Most Wanted is tighter, and the peaks of 1992’s The Predator, released after the Rodney King verdict-inspired L.A. rebellion, are higher. But Death Certificate is Ice Cube’s most important album, and one of the most essential works in rap history. Released a few months after Cube’s star turn as the dead-eyed Doughboy in the summer 1991 release Boyz in the Hood, and preceded by the irresistible first single “Steady Mobbin,” Death Certificate was anticipated like few rap albums had ever been. It had been six months since the King tape showed the LAPD gang-assaulting a black motorist, and their trial wouldn’t start for another six. A million copies of Death Certificate were shipped, and it was certified platinum two months after it hit stores. In the shadow of the King video, and with tensions higher than ever between south LA’s black citizens and the police, expectations were high for Cube, who at the time co-owned rap’s creative and political mantle with Chuck D. With Death Certificate, Cube met them head on.  In a nod toward the vinyl format that was rapidly obsolescing in 1991, Cube split the album into the “Death Side” (“a mirror image of where we are today”) and the “Life Side” (“a vision of where we need to go”). Other rap albums had toyed with the “concept” idea—De La Soul’s 1989 LP 3 Feet High and Rising was a big influence on Cube for AMW, skits and all. Yet due to its status, Death Certificate established a permanent lane for conceptual works in rap music, which Nas and the Notorious B.I.G. would capitalize on with their own death-fixated concept albums a few years later.Death Certificate’s sides serve as an organizing mechanism for Cube’s two primary subject areas. The “Death Side” is Cube as crass hood storyteller, relating oft-hilarious tales about the VD clinic, stopping at your mom’s house to take a shit, haranguing a girl’s dad about her most intimate activities, even a trip to St. Louis that wound up in a jail stay. “Look Who’s Burnin’” and “Steady Mobbin’” show Cube’s unparalleled skill at lighthearted, detail-rich, slice-of-South Central-life songs—they predict not only the melancholic “It Was a Good Day,” but 1995 film Friday, Cube’s loving, hilarious ode to a single day in his neighborhood. And yes, some of these songs are stomach-churning—“Givin’ Up the Nappy Dugout” wavers between slut-shaming and sexual assault—but the “Death Side” concept is designed to allow Cube a performative “out.” This isn’t autobiography, it argues, but a reflection of the worst impulses of his community (personal mileage, as always, may vary).The “Life Side,” conversely, is Cube as op-ed columnist, a racially isolationist embodiment of the album’s cover image of Cube standing next to a corpse tagged as “Uncle Sam,” with all the metaphorical subtlety of a political cartoonist. Interracial dating, moving to the suburbs, selling drugs, gangbanging: all of these are noxious activities that are preventing the black race (okay, black men) from reaching its potential. This side, significantly more controversial than the first, was an outgrowth of Cube’s fortuitous 1990 run-in with Chuck D. in the Def Jam lobby. After splitting with N.W.A. and learning that Ruthless wouldn’t let Dre produce his first solo album, Cube headed east, to track down 3rd Bass’ producer. After running into D., Cube took a feature slot on Public Enemy’s 1990 single “Burn Hollywood Burn,” and an east/west creative partnership was established.D. and the Bomb Squad would exert a huge influence on Amerikkka’s Most Wanted. “Public Enemy taught me how to put a record together as far as knowing what song should come after what song and the feel of a record,” Cube later recalled. “Chuck D is a master at that. How it’s sequenced as a whole is just as important as each individual record.” AMW was a huge step forward for West Coast rap, with Cube further shaping the “nigga” and “gangsta” archetypes he’d started with N.W.A. while creating something close to a full conceptual work complete with skits, samples from the actual America’s Most Wanted television show, and an overall consistency that the shallow-past-the-singles Straight Outta Compton lacked.Cube’s other P.E.-inspired transformation was happening at the content level, as he turned N.W.A.’s shock-rap into a new hybrid form: part gangsta nihilism and part post-Black Power militarism, inspired by P.E.’s deep connections with the Nation of Islam and its controversial figurehead Louis Farrakhan. The differences between P.E. and Cube are instructive: if “Fight the Power” pioneered a form of post-Black Power cultural politics informed by a desire for a cultural movement, then AMW proper opener “The Nigga You Love To Hate” (and its sequel, Death Certificate opener ‘The Wrong Nigga to Fuck With”) is driven by Cube’s sui generis self-interest. Where Chuck D. was an outspoken diplomat, Cube was a righteous mercenary in the KRS-One mold, aiming as much at suburban pieties—hey kids, check out “Gangsta’s Fairytale”!—as his perceived enemies. After eight years under Ronald Reagan’s oppressive social and economic policies, which were particularly devastating to black communities, it made sense for a politicized South Central rapper to shun the idea of community mobilization and carve out a cultural politics of the self. The already privileged succeeded wildly, while historically marginalized populations like those in Compton and South Central L.A. deteriorated. Reagan’s Draconian “war on drugs” devastated inner cities for generations. First Lady Nancy urged kids to “Just Say No,” placing the onus to wipe out the crack epidemic not on the state but the individual. This same bootstraps ideal did away with civil rights organizing in exchange for self-entrepreneurship in a putatively free market, and it was from this landscape that Cube’s new identity was born. Jeff Chang explained it best in Cant Stop, Won’t Stop: “If Nation of Millions had signaled the end of the civil rights era, Death Certificate’s primary impulse was to dance on the grave.” On Death Certificate, Cube expanded AMW’s lone-gunman individualism into a fierce, convoluted political manifesto. It’s not just about Cube alone anymore, but the future of young black men. “Niggaz are in a state of emergency” are the first seven words on the album. “I want to see my brothers and sisters on a higher economical level and treating themselves with more respect,” Cube told the L.A. Times in 1991. “The American Dream is not for Blacks. Blacks who (still believe in that dream) are kidding themselves…What I try to do is tell the kids the truth…the brutal, harsh truth—pulling no punches—about what's out there in the world.” Cube’s truth-telling was rooted in his recently forged relationship to the Nation of Islam, a movement that had recenty brought back to prominence by the outspoken Farrakhan. The NOI had done much good for Black communities over time by preaching a gospel of self-reliance and racial separatism. Both notions permeate Death Certificate’s politics, and, it should be noted, experienced their renaissance during that same individualistic, increasingly identity-factionalized 1980s.  On the album’s CD tray image, Cube is pictured reading the NOI newspaper The Final Call, while strategically positioned between his recently assembled Lench Mob crew on the left and Nation representatives standing at attention on the right. It’s tough to know how much Cube’s NOI affiliation was rooted in ideological purity or performative opportunism—on “Steady Mobbin’”, he wonders if the better come-up is to “start sellin’ bean pies” or bootleg “You Can’t Touch This” t-shirts—though he’d obviously taken Farrakhan’s recommendation to use his fame to spread the word. In 1991, the devout Muslim and Watts-bred rapper Kam and Nation spokesperson Khalid Abdul Muhammad shaved off Cube’s “toxic” Jheri curl, and both appear on the album.  It’s easy to draw a direct line between NOI teachings (including a discredited, Cube-endorsed book that alleges Jewish people dominated the trans-Atlantic slave trade) and Cube’s anti-Semitic remarks on “No Vaseline,” Cube’s response to N.W.A.’s diss-track diptych “Message to B.A.” and “Real Niggaz” (the latter of which was repurposed from the 100 Miles and Runnin’ EP). “No Vaseline” doesn’t fit with the rest of Death Certificate at all—it’s like Cube left the stage and confronted N.W.A. in an alley behind the venue, bringing his mic. Although the violence was symbolic, “No Vaseline” remains a hateful song, Cube using homophobia and anti-Semitism as crude weaponry for his macho language battle. The track led the Simon Wiesenthal Center to call for a nationwide boycott of Death Certificate because Cube recommends dispensing with the “devil” Heller by putting “a bullet in his temple.” Island Records, which distributed the album in Europe, removed “Vaseline” (and “Black Korea”) from copies there. In his review of “Death Certificate,” the Village Voice’s Robert Christgau called Cube a “sex bigot” and compared “Vaseline” to Axl Rose’s xenophobic lyrics on “One in a Million.”The “Vaseline” controversy fed headlines for months, and for Cube’s millions of fans, its real-life soap-opera thrill only fed into the song’s problematic appeal. Like with so much art that is virtuosic and problematic in equal measure, many took perverse joy listening to Cube eradicate precarious communicative boundaries that help maintain civil discourse. Especially for the teenage boys who comprised Cube’s core audience at the time, “No Vaseline” was its own rap Wrestlemania headline bout: a triumphal act of face-saving in an easy-to-replicate cadence over a sample of Brick’s 1976 disco-funk hit “Dazz.” Cube flipped Ren’s “too much cargo” line from “Real Niggaz” and called him out for driving a B-210, and even turned Eazy-E’s subversive attendance at a Presidential dinner into an act of kowtowing to white authority. Even the song’s title (and theme) was intertextual: It was pulled from LL Cool J’s “To Da Break of Dawn” from the previous year, on which he eviscerates three foes: Kool Moe Dee, MC Hammer, and Ice-T. Cube outdid L there: he took out five enemies in one song.  Until Jay-Z’s 2001 Nas-dismantling “Takeover,” “No Vaseline” was rap’s peak diss track: a non-stop series of consecutively landed, clever punchlines. N.W.A. would break up before getting a chance to respond.“No Vaseline”s flawlessly executed “dozens” routine was one thing. The inflammatory 47-second track “Black Korea,” on which Cube rails against—and obliquely threatens—Korean-American shop owners, was another. The community relationship between Korean-American merchants (who had run liquor stores and convenience shops in black parts of Los Angeles for years) was already tense, but it was inflamed by the 1991 shooting of 15-year-old Latasha Harlins by South Central liquor store owner Soon Ja Du, captured on surveillance video only two weeks after the King footage was released. On “Korea,” Cube alternately suggests a boycott (for which there was precedent) and arson for non-compliant storeowners, characterized as “Oriental, one-penny countin’ motherfuckers” and “chop-suey ass.”The broader context of this issue is best characterized by Chang: Korean-American storeowners were overworked and often terrorized by local gang members; in 1986, Chang notes, the Black-Korean Alliance was formed after four Korean merchants were killed in a single month. Black citizens, on the other hand, were tired of local merchants who wouldn’t hire black workers, who didn’t give back to local communities, and who assumed that any black-skinned person entering their stores had criminal intent.“Black Korea” was not a nuanced song, but Cube wasn’t a politician or a diplomat. He’s “the nigga you love to hate,” and “the wrong nigga to fuck with.” To many critics, however, Death Certificate was merely “the rankest sort of racism and hatemongering,” as Billboard argued in a rare editorial condemning the album. At The Source, editor James Bernard replied to Billboard in a manner befitting his publication’s mindset and audience: the industry magazine was “too dainty and thin-skinned to hear the anger and rage and frustration that many people are forced to deal with every day.” This was the official line from Cube’s camp as well. When Christgau asked for comment, Cube’s publicist Leyla Turkkan framed Death Certificate as “an honest expression of black rage.” Bernard went further (and broader) in a review for Entertainment Weekly: “I’m not arrogant enough to wag my finger at someone for stridency or incorrect language when many of his friends are dead and many of the rest are either in prison or standing on the corner surrounded by burned-out buildings and dying dreams,” he wrote. “These people don’t get to write magazine articles, don’t get elected to political office, and don’t get appointed to the Supreme Court.”As 2Pac would two years later with Strictly 4 My N.I.G.G.A.Z., Cube exploited the mainstream exposure he was receiving as an opportunity to more powerfully broadcast his narrowly intended address. “The truth is I don't care what the white community thinks about the record,” Cube told the LA Times. “I'm talking directly to my Black brothers and sisters. I speak in a language we talk in the streets. Other people can listen too—they might learn something—but I'm talking to the black kids who need somebody to talk sense—honest sense—to them.” This raises a crucial question that we still deal with today: whites bought Death Certificate—an album aimed toward black communities—in the millions. How was a white kid in the Midwest suburbs supposed to assume a subject position as the addressee of a song like “Us,” a song that examines the failures of young black men to take ownership of their own futures, and not rely on government intervention? The answer: we couldn’t. Instead, we eavesdropped.Indeed, one of the most profound cultural shifts occasioned by the rise of gangsta rap, and pioneered by Ice Cube on Death Certificate, is the phenomenon of mass-cultural “listening in.” An album that sells millions of copies is designed to function as a communicative channel from one young black man to an audience of other black men. Chang called Death Certificate “the most impassioned attempt to speak to the young guns of South Central since Bunchy Carter had left the Slausons for the Panthers.” On one hand, of course, this perspective permits Cube a tautological “out”—“I’m not talking to you so you’re not my audience”—that is logically disproven by the fact that he’s releasing the album to a mass audience. On the other hand, understanding the intended audience of a work is absolutely crucial to empathizing with its message.And there were messages: Amid Cube’s fiercest isolationist tendencies, Death Certificate exposes structural failings in a way that no rapper had yet attempted with this degree of clarity. Non-Black listeners may have bought the album for the illicit thrills of “Steady Mobbin’,” “Look Who’s Burnin’” or “No Vaseline,” but those with open ears could learn a lot from “Alive on Arrival.” Dramatically concluding the album’s “Life” side, penultimate track “Arrival” is a grim, detail-rich narrative of a drug-related shooting victim (“looked down, and my sweatshirt’s red at the bottom”) who dies while waiting for treatment at South Central’s MLK Community Hospital after being harassed by the LAPD. Cube’s description of his waiting room horror makes for one of the album’s most richly ironic lines: “One hour done passed/Done watched two episodes of M*A*S*H*”. Much of the public attention paid to Death Certificate was devoted to Cube’s lashing out at anyone who stands in his way, but on “Arrival,” he talks about “an overworked physician” who didn’t have the time to give his character more than a band-aid and IV. “Why, oh why, can’t I get help?” Cube pleads as the song concludes. “’Cause I’m Black, I gots to go for self.”Then there’s “A Bird in the Hand,” Cube’s single greatest solo work (with respect to “Who’s the Mack,” “Dead Homiez” and “It Was a Good Day”), and one of the signal moments not only for gangsta rap, but rap history. For just over two minutes, Cube perfectly combines the hardhead, oft-comical street narratives of the Death Side with the fiercely opinionated Life Side tracks. As rhetoric, it’s powerful: the day-to-day life of a young black man in Bush Sr.’s America was pinned in on all sides, with no logical action for economic survival, let alone success, that didn’t involve drug dealing. The trade-offs are expressed with sharp detail—“Always knew that I would clock G’s/But ‘Welcome to McDonalds, may I take your order please?”—and pragmatism: “So now you got a pep talk/But sorry, this is our only room to walk.”This is saying nothing about the track itself, which is magisterial: Cube’s production crew the Boogiemen (DJ Pooh, Bobcat, and Rashad) interrupt the album’s George Clinton fixation to flip Jimmue Haskell’s paranormal string break from the final third of B.B. King’s 1970 slave-trade opus “Chains and Things” over a razor-sliced drum knock from the first seconds of the Five Stairsteps’ “Don’t Change Your Love.” Kendrick Lamar’s 2012 flip of those drums and Cube’s “fresh outta school” opening line in the MC Eiht-featuring “m.A.A.d City”—a work deeply inspired by Cube’s early ’90s albums—made for a spine-tingling moment of cross-generational gangsta-rap continuity. Lamar himself inducted Cube and the rest of N.W.A. into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in April 2016, largely because of the Cube-penned “Fuck the Police” and “Straight Outta Compton.” That’s just one metric of his reputation, however. To many 2016 teenagers—the age group who loves Lamar and would’ve bought Death Certificate in 1991—N.W.A. is classic rap, canonized in a 2015 biopic, Cube’s solo career is most likely boiled down to “It Was a Good Day,” and he’s more widely known as the star of Friday and the Barbershop movies, if not the angry Captain Dickson in 21 Jump Street. The proto-reality “true-crime” moment of the late 80s and early 90s that spawned Cube’s approach toward rap storytelling has itself morphed into a celebreality TV entertainment juggernaut (see: Kanye, Drake, the Game), while smartphone footage of police killing Black citizens has become a macabre reality of daily online life, mortifying millions but spurring little actual change.Polls show that the country is more racially divided than at any time since the Rodney King verdict, six months after Ice Cube tossed Death Certificate like a Molotov cocktail into the nation’s heated debate about race and rights. In 2016, the death rate for black Americans, according to the CDC, is roughly 50% higher than for whites. Much about American culture—who may speak publicly, who may be defended—has changed for the better since late 1991, rendering much of Death Certificate’s sexism, homophobia, racism and anti-Semitism antiquated. At the same time, however, the rest of the album—a Black artist forcefully arguing for Black unity and freedom in the face of looming, state-sanctioned mortality—remains as sadly as relevant as ever. CORRECTION: An earlier version of this article misidentified Khalid Abdul Muhammad, the onetime Nation of Islam spokesperson featured on Death Certificate.At first blush, Redemption, the new Dawn Richard record, feels like a victory lap. The conclusion to a trilogy of albums, Redemption signifies the end of a project that felt, at one point, as if its completion were uncertain, between shifting collaborators and Richard's brief 2014 reunion with the girl group Danity Kane. Redemption's opening tracks also seem to confirm that it's intended as the inverse to its predecessor, 2015's Blackheart, the sound of which was thick and full of dissonance; Redemption initially feels weightless. As it progresses, though, it reveals a depth that's both distinct from its predecessors and draws on them both. Richard's 2013 album, Goldenheart, seemed to describe a disintegrating relationship that had ascended into myth; Richard positioned herself as if she were engaged in battle with her own emotions, and through metaphor her emotions had swollen into literal giants. “Faced the beast with my bare hands/Tried to break me down with all his strength,” she sang in “Goliath.” Blackheart was more slippery, a vortex of introspection in which Richard’s grasp of metaphor seemed to deliberately loosen, so that mythical figures like Calypso and the Titans coexisted with the thrum of amphetamines and the slur of depression.If Goldenheart is aggressive and Blackheart is depressive, Redemption is reflective. This is a curious position from which to record a dance record; the dance floor is rarely characterized as a reflective space. More often it is utopian, escapist, a portal to an alternate reality. In the first proper song, “Love Under Lights,” Richard paints her own dance floor vision. She encounters a woman in a Led Zeppelin shirt, and they start to talk about music. “She said she fucking with Drake/I said King Kendrick,” Richard sings as the synthetic pulses behind her ripple and gleam. “I guess we’re kindred spirits.” Richard conceives of the dance floor as a place of protest (“Black Crimes”), of contemplation (“Voices”), of engagement (“Vines”), all of which are components of desire, whether for another person or another life. The drums behind her shatter and reorganize themselves into new rhythms throughout the album , as if they’re building and disassembling digital chandeliers.The production on Redemption is distinct from the glassy backdrops her former collaborator and manager Druski provided on Goldenheart, and it's a deliberate move away from Blackheart's production, which felt like being sucked into a whirlpool. Blackheart’s primary producer, Noisecastle III, appears twice on Redemption, on “Black Crimes” and “LA,” but his more collagist aesthetic blends seamlessly with the sound world that Machinedrum and Richard build, an incandescent fusion of the organic and the synthetic, the electronic and the acoustic.The notes that open “Voices,” while digitally manipulated and multiplied, sound like they've been issued from a bass clarinet. The bass tones that break through the surface of “Renegades” are oddly reminiscent of a tuba. “LA” is a parallel ode to Louisiana, where Richard was born, and Los Angeles, where Richard lives now; it mutates from a stuttered, ultramodern gleam into a spiraling guitar solo that sounds imported from a ’70s jazz fusion album. Then the melody shifts again, this time performed by a polyphonic brass band arranged by Trombone Shorty to resemble a New Orleans second line parade. The integrity of Richard's voice provides the through line, which is often caught in ghostly tangles of itself or locking into prismatic harmonies, similar to how Prince or D’Angelo treated their voices. On the interludes, which are often as fully formed as the actual songs, Richard isolates and distorts her voice until it seems to separate into kilobytes. “Hey Nikki” is the closest the album comes to settling into an R&B tradition: It's an inversion of Prince’s “Darling Nikki,” considering the character through a different lens; instead of viewing her as an object of desire, it isolates her agency, and the song generates its desire from the aura of that agency. (Blackheart did the same thing with the titular character of Michael Jackson’s “Billie Jean.”) Richard’s voice floats above the music in the verses, but  doubles, deepens, and fights through a menacing haze in the chorus: “Hey Nikki/Don't you wanna come and get with me?”After “Hey Nikki” the album descends into a more introspective space. “Sands” describes a past relationship; In “The Louvre” she elevates someone into “a work of art” as a way of letting them go, and then the record itself lets go of its own instrumentation as it segues the outro, “Valhalla.” Richard, her voice heavily processed, finally glimpses her utopia; it is one “where rebels are the majority/And my color isn't a minority.” The tone is one of arrival after a long struggle, but there are hints, too, that this maybe a fantasy: “Escape,” she sings, and it feels as if her promised land was a mirage, forever shimmering just out of reach.Through most of What’s Your Sign?, the new album by veteran maximalist composer Rhys Chatham and Brooklyn DIY drone-blasters Oneida, Chatham takes only minimal steps into the spotlight. Perhaps inverting the usual super-session logic, Chatham’s guitar and trumpet blend convincingly into Oneida’s 15-year-running noisenik dynamic, while the quintet channel the power of Chatham’s work. The 35-minute LP never achieves the epic scale that both can work at—Chatham with his armies of up to 400 guitarists, Oneida via their rigorous eight-hour-straight Ocropolis performances—but each of the six tracks generates a be-here-now flash of present-tense psychedelia, hallucinations by way of overtones and volume.Missing a monumental centerpiece, What's Your Sign? comes closest with the nine-minute “Well Tuned Guitar,” its title referencing the microtonal work of Chatham’s one-time teacher, the psychedelic minimalist La Monte Young. Building towards slashing chords—and Chatham’s big spotlight—the drama draws from the rhythmic language Chatham has been refining since 1977’s “Guitar Trio,” written after seeing the Ramones at CBGB. It’s perhaps the only place the pairing doesn’t completely click. In the hands of Oneida, while still sounding convincingly enormous, the approach also feels slightly contained, as if following a map instead of the terrain itself. Oneida’s semi-formalist mind-exploding can be heard more vividly on the disc-opening “You Get Brighter,” an exercise in forward motion driven by drummer Kid Millions, a propulsion that seems as if it could keep expanding outwards forever. Chatham’s guitar bends and freaks with the rest of the Oneida brahs, his voice adding to the song’s one-line refrain, both a signpost and conductor’s baton.Oneida sometimes function more like a liquid light show than a traditional rock band. They most often concern themselves with a swirl of repetition, the type of music where—watching live—it’s not always possible to tell who is making what sound, perhaps not even for those playing in the band, either. Chatham and Oneida’s music feels most natural in these places, using the change of texture as a form of a movement. On a pair of drumless jams, “Bad Brains” and “The Mabinogian,” the music never stops pressing into the unknown, the driving pulse only heard in the negative space between oscillations. The music itself could be coming from any combination of the three guitarists and two keyboardists, a free improv counterpoint to the full-throttle rhythmic spectacles heard elsewhere.The balance of What's Your Sign? makes it feel like an Oneida album, built on power and cosmic eruptions. Besides the Positions EP (featuring a driving cover of This Heat's “S.P.Q.R.”), it’s the band’s first proper release in four years. In the interim, they’ve transformed even more fully into a live act; in 2013, a 48-minute set-opening incarnation of “You Get Brighter” did almost expand outwards forever. Besides the touch of Chatham’s compositional hand on “Well Tuned Guitar,” What's Your Sign? is another sliver of Oneida’s ever-jamming life, a place both unpredictable and consistent, where collaborators like Chatham might arrive and make themselves at home. Even tracks that start out sounding nothing like Oneida fall easily into the band’s gravity well. On “A. Phillip Randolph at Back Bay Station,” after Chatham strikes a gentle keynote with layered flute, the band quickly lifts into a group glide over a rolling snare drum sea.Chatham’s trumpet loops finally break through and take over the four minutes of the album-closing “Civil Weather.” It’s a mode that one wouldn’t expect to find Oneida exploring, more Jon Hassell-like Fourth World bliss than kosmiche fire music, a trumpet clearing a central path down the middle of Oneida space. But in plenty of other ways—sure, why not? It’s a new place they find together, the kind of spot they might get to for a few minutes one night when the tapers didn’t make it out, and then never try again. With more than one What’s Your Sign? track fading to delighted in-studio laughter, it’s only a surprise when it ends so soon.Like a lot of minimalist art, Sarah Davachi’s music appears simple on the surface. Not a lot seems to happen, at least not in terms of melody, rhythm, or any of the usual categories of Western popular music: Her music consists mainly of long held tones. The real action is not found in the notes themselves but in their microtonal variations and the wealth of overtones, harmonics, and ghostly pulses produced by the friction between them. Her work belongs to a tradition of deep, shimmering drone music that includes Eliane Radigue, Kevin Drumm, Phill Niblock, La Monte Young and Marian Zazeela, and Folke Rabe.Despite its apparent restraint, Davachi’s music is also profoundly expressive. Her filters sweep back and forth in slow, deliberate, and often unpredictable movements that suggest the careful thought process that drives the hand behind them. The subtlest change can set in motion complicated chain reactions—ebbing and flowing, wheels turning within wheels. Play her music in a quiet room on good speakers and you can practically see the air moving around your head.In part, this has to do with her tools. Davachi, who studied electronic music at Mills College, in Oakland, California, typically works with a mixture of acoustic and electronic sources, or even purely acoustic instruments. Her album All My Circles Run, from earlier this year, is a set of studies for overdubbed strings, voice, organ, and piano. On Vergers, she turns her attention to the EMS Synthi 100, an analog synthesizer from the early 1970s, and complements its unusually vibrant tone with almost imperceptible additions of voice and violin.It is her most minimal album yet. Its three long tracks initially feel almost static; they evolve so stealthily that it's easy to find yourself adrift in the middle, wondering just how you got there. The opening “Gentle So Gentle,” nearly 22 minutes long, begins with a single octave, its tones wavering like heat mirages. A minute passes; then two. It takes a while to notice a pair of quiet background tones, glowing like street lights in fog. In time, it will come to feel like all seven notes of a minor scale are resonating in blurry unison. Timbres shift; tones fatten. For a spell, the sound resembles a piano whose sustain pedal has been held down. Then, a pair of clarinets. Fifteen minutes in, and the atmosphere turns celestial for its final passage. The piece begins on a different note than the one with which it began, and even though you probably won't notice it, that shift lends an extra element of tension. There is no resolution; it is a question with no answer, an imperative to keep moving.Where “Gentle So Gentle” is shot through with light, “Ghosts and All” is charged with dread. Over buzzing pedal tones, thin, violin-like textures saw queasily back and forth, like a camera panning across a burned forest. It is as bleak as the grimmest doom metal. Once again, she proves herself a master manipulator of frequency, stacking up layers until even the root note is lost in the miasma, and you're left disoriented, unable to find your footing.The third and final track, “In Staying,” uses similar strategies, but it's immediately distinguishable from its companions. (Proof that Davachi is not your average drone artist is her facility for evoking wildly different universes with such a modest set of tools.) The sound evokes church bells that have been frozen in mid-peal. New tones bleed into earshot, and the bells melt away. Now we are inside a glacier, perhaps; the time scale is unfathomably long. Inside the sound, made one with the all-encompassing hum, a million tiny vibrations collide. If timbre is one of Davachi’s primary materials, time is another—thus her all-enveloping matrix of infinite ripple—and with “In Staying,” she manages a feat that is nearly impossible in music: She makes time itself seem to stand stock still.  Pianist Vicky Chow has been building a discography focused on modern classical sounds ever since completing her studies at Juilliard and the Manhattan School of Music. She appeared on a release from John Zorn’s Tzadik imprint, and interpreted the music of John Cage. More recently, she made a star turn on a Steve Reich album. Though Chow is obviously a virtuoso when it comes to acoustic work, she has also shown an interest in pieces that employ electronics. Her premiere of Reich’s “Piano Counterpoint” required her to play against pre-recorded parts; Chow’s recording of composer Tristan Perich’s Surface Image found the pianist threading notes in between 40 channels of chirping, 1-bit sound. Due to that resume, it’s hardly a shock to discover that Chow’s sophomore album for the New Amsterdam label involves electro-acoustic setups. A O R T A features pieces from six up-and-coming composers, each of whom pushes the limits of the instrument in some way. Christopher Cerrone’s “Hoyt-Schermerhorn” has an icy profile, at first, as softly played progressions creep slowly into the piano’s highest reaches. But when a rising figure in a low octave is introduced, Chow’s playing communicates the effusive release embedded in those notes (even as the overall harmony remains melancholic). Unusually dense layers of sustain are the product of an electronic patch created by the composer. But even when Cerrone’s digital design asserts itself more clearly—via glitchy, refracted notes—the center of the piece holds.  Another winner is Molly Joyce’s “Rave.” The work starts out sounding anything but exultant, sporting motifs that seem emotionally mismatched. (In the score, Joyce’s description of a tempo as “controlled but on the edge” seems appropriate.) As the composition develops, Joyce’s lines achieve an odd syncopation, and ultimately a sense of balance strong enough to suggest a club-influenced feel. There is a potent sense of physicality in Chow’s performance of that piece—one which also carries over to Andy Akiho’s “Vick(i/y).” Written for Chow and fellow pianist Vicki Ray, Akiho’s prepared-piano opus stretches the range of the instrument by calling for the direct strumming of strings inside the piano’s body. That technique isn’t a new one. But Akiho’s use of it here serves percussive and melodic ends that prove structurally satisfying, when traditional-sounding lines sprout and shoot away from the modernist opening material.The rest of the hour-long program isn’t quite on the same level as those compositions, though the pieces are all worth hearing. Jacob Cooper’s “Clifton Gates” is a clever homage to John Adams’s famous minimalist composition “Phrygian Gates.” Jakub Ciupinksi’s four-movement “Morning Tale” has moments of dramatic propulsion. Two movements from Daniel Wohl’s “Aorta” contain the composer’s typical blend of jabbing aggression and dreamy fluidity. Though without a full performance of the work, its impression is necessarily muted. Chow handles these composers’ various electronic setups with grace, never letting the tech overwhelm the particular aesthetic. Arrangement eccentricities aside, the most notable quality of A O R T A is the pianist’s deep, evident investment in these consistently rewarding pieces.It’s not clear whether Free Bricks 2: Zone 6 Edition is supposed to exist. Future and Gucci Mane’s new six-song exercise has been scrubbed from the Soundcloud page that birthed it and left to kick around in inconspicuous tracks bundles or in the YouTube ether. It came with no warning and left with little fanfare, a nineteen-minute exhale from two of the most visible and, probably, overworked rappers in the world. Unless one of these songs pops off under new packaging, Free Bricks 2 is probably going to come and go (The Return of East Atlanta Santa in stores December 16). Which is a shame, because Free Bricks 2 is pretty potent dose of what makes Future and Gucci Mane so magnetic.Written and recorded in less than 24 hours, the sequel to 2011’s Free Bricks is fresh to a fault, with a few cadences that could have been smoothed out, a few points where Gucci still sounds as if he’s getting his post-prison footing. (Speaking of timeliness and Terre Haute, an otherwise unmemorable line about Monica Lewinsky from opener “RR Trucks” sticks in your brain because of Gucci’s heart-wrenching get out the vote speech from earlier this month.) Also endearing: two cult heroes decide to open their new record with a song about maybe, at some indeterminate point in the future, buying a new car they’ve heard about.“Selling Heroin,” which Southside furnishes with a beautiful bounce is, decidedly, a Gucci Mane song. This proves to be a freeing thing for Future. Since Honest was received coolly by his hardcore fanbase, the preposterously good-looking Atlantan has retreated to his wheelhouse. The career-defining run that began on Monster, became codified on 56 Nights, and culminated with last July’s DS2 was built almost exclusively on songs that forewent the joy or R&B experimentation of his first two LPs. Here, Future comes unhinged just a little; most importantly, he sounds like he’s having fun. As for Gucci, he’s been on a slow ramp up since his release from custody. This summer’s Everybody Looking was solid, but would have been unremarkable if it came out during his storied mixtape run; last month’s Woptober has more world-class rapping than its predecessor, but no songs that will significantly alter the Gucci canon. While his pen seems mostly intact, the Zone 6 legend can’t quite find the right vocal register, what with the massive weight loss and newfound sobriety. This is likely to be sorted out soon, but in the meantime there are moments when he sounds like he’s searching. There are also brief passages where Gucci’s vocals come unmoored from the beat in a way his more laconic early-Obama self seldom did. But Gucci finds the pocket frequently on Free Bricks 2, and the result is always a joy. On “Die a Gangsta,” he raps: “They call me East Atlanta Santa, I’ma fuck up the profit/I’m the Grinch that stole Christmas, I might go in your stocking/I’m talking, too cocky, I got so much juice/My wrist is too rocky, they done let Wop loose.” Even if Future’s cool disaffect is en vogue, Gucci is the record’s emotional center, and when he’s booking luxe hotel room penthouses for shooters or buying his sixteenth Bentley, he’s the only rapper in the world you want to listen to. That’s the insane gravitational pull that Gucci’s somehow managed to harness: when he’s on, not only is he endlessly listenable, he renders his fiercest competition an afterthought. Free Bricks 2 benefits from a superb production lineup—Southside and Metro Boomin split duties, except for when they pass the baton to Zaytoven, who’s played a crucial role in ushering each rapper into the limelight. Zay helms “Kind a Dope,” the record’s highlight, where Gucci channels Ridin’ Dirty and raps, “When you was playing basketball, man, I was playing Pimp C.” This little piece of Gucci's legacy is forgotten, and it’s the crux of why a tape like this can be so impressive; even if Future and Gucci Mane are cast as instinctive, impulsive savants, each is drawing on a wealth of musical knowledge that informs their work. Free Bricks 2 will likely get lost in the shuffle, but it’s the sound of two superlative talents working without boundaries. “If any of y’all wanna give me shit about my twang, you can just do it,” Gillian Welch once told a chatty San Francisco crowd in 1994. It was two years before Welch would release her debut Revival, but the California-bred daughter of two entertainers was already anticipating the skepticism that would greet her when she rose to prominence in the mid-to-late ’90s singing about destitute coal miners and Depression-era whiskey runners with an unsettling familiarity for someone born in New York City, raised in Los Angeles, and who found their lifetime musical partner at a conservatory in Boston. In 1994, Welch’s repertoire consisted largely of a number of songs that would never find their way onto a record, a handful of traditional tunes, and some John Prine covers. For an artist with an aesthetic as carefully and consistently rendered as Gillian Welch, it’s strange to think of a time when she wasn’t producing or reproducing that aesthetic, but was, rather, searching for it herself.That sense of fresh discovery and wide-eyed experimentation can be heard plainly on Boots No. 1, Welch’s first archival release that serves as a 20th anniversary expanded release for her debut LP.  The two-disc collection is comprised of outtakes, demos, and alternate takes culled from the Revival sessions, a time when Welch and guitarist Dave Rawlings were first honing in on their precise sound, mood, and style. “There really was no me. The artist Gillian Welch didn’t really exist,” Welch has said of the sessions, “And then after that, I did.”Welch’s spectral country music has always felt otherworldly in its ability to evoke feelings, memories and atmosphere on command. “Sound [that] holds moods the way humid air holds smells,” is how writer Jedediah Purdy has described it. Part of the revelation of Boots No. 1, then, is witnessing Welch’s music made mortal, to hear her navigating her many influences with a young artist’s enlightened uncertainty, and to hear imperfect recordings that may not necessarily conjure universes on their own accord so much as they recall old-fashioned country music that’d sound at home on the radio.Some of the most thrilling moments on this 21-song release are just that: hit records. “455 Rocket” is a hand-clapping muscle car ode in which Welch deadpans goofy lines likes like, “Whose junk pile piece of sh….Chevelle is this?” “Dry Town” is a talking country-blues Johnny Cash pastiche about craving a six-pack for the road. The former became a hit for country singer Kathy Mattea in 1997, while the latter ended up, a decade later, on Miranda Lambert’s chart-topping Crazy Ex-Girlfriend.Nevertheless, witnessing gradual transformation can be revelatory, and several early takes lay bare the process of refining Gillian Welch into “Gillian Welch” with staggering clarity. The version of “Paper Wings” that made its way to the final album is much slower, sparser, and jazz-leaning than the honky-tonk demo. Moments like this show how greatly producer T Bone Burnett’s subtle aesthetics helped sculpt Welch’s sound.Listening to the original Revival now, it’s astounding to hear all the constructed artifices and delicate contemporary flourishes that were so easy to overlook when the album first came out. The closing moments of “Orphan Girl,” Welch’s first signature tune, reveal a shocking swirl of grungy guitar feedback and tape distortion. “One More Dollar” is just one of several songs with a crisp, full rhythm section, a reminder that Welch and Rawlings wouldn’t settle into their now-famous acoustic duo format until 1998’s follow up Hell Among the Yearlings.As several of these new songs also affirm, Welch’s third-person storylines often point inwards at moving autobiography. Like so much of Revival, “Wichita” and “Riverboat Song” are stories of movement and motion that trace both the thrill of fleeing home and the lonely alienation of being a stranger in the big city. Both songs were written just a year after Welch and Rawlings had moved to Nashville, a period when the two singers lived a ghostly existence spent largely recording music in the middle of the night by themselves.Part of Welch and Rawlings’ aura is the sense that their music exists out of time, so it’s illuminating to hear the two artists conversing so intimately with contemporary genres and artists. They cover Robert Earl Keen and later, respond to him in song with “I Don’t Want to Go Downtown.” Lyrically, “Barroom Girls” is an equal-rights-to-party anthem that would’ve sounded at home on a Lilith Fair mainstage. On the other hand, “Pass You by” is strikingly loud, just a full drum-kit away from sounding like an outtake on Wilco’s roots-grunge opus Being There, released six months after Revival.   All of which goes to show that the authenticity scare that surrounded Welch upon her arrival feels, twenty years later, almost unrecognizably dated. Perhaps it’s because Welch herself, who would go on to play an integral role in Americana’s big-bang O Brother, Where Art Thou? soundtrack just a few years later, has since become the very aesthetic and artistic paradigm for 21st-century roots singer-songwriters. Or, perhaps, it’s because the anxieties about Welch’s authentic credentials were so misguided in the first place.  If you know the feeling of being jolted awake at 3 AM by every outstanding obligation in your life, you'll recognize the paralyzing anxiety embedded in the lyrics of Jeff Rosenstock’s third solo LP. To wit: “Ignorance is bliss until the day/The things you ignored all come into focus.” When those things emerge, they will waylay you with the same nagging, needling and relentless tone that knows every single pressure point in your system. Rosenstock has always sung like this, so WORRY. isn’t a case of an artist finding his voice. Rather, it’s an artist finding his muse—it's right there in the title—and making the record of his life.Rosenstock didn’t really need a magnum opus to solidify his reputation as one of the most important figures in modern punk music—in certain circles, he’s basically an Ian MacKaye figure, a paragon of ethics whose web-based, pay-what-you-want record label gave him legitimate reason to feel salty when Nine Inch Nails and Radiohead were called revolutionaries for doing the same thing years later. However, he was doing this as the leader of a ska-punk project called the Arrogant Sons of Bitches and, later, Bomb the Music Industry! As the names of these acts might imply, this stuff wasn’t bound for mainstream acceptance, though Rosenstock’s sonic and philosophical influence has been acknowledged by verbose and principled young acts like Joyce Manor, Modern Baseball, and Mitski. WORRY. isn’t an obvious crossover attempt. Rosenstock touches on almost every intersection of pop and punk, whether or not it’s credible: there are flashes of Jawbreaker’s real-talk scene reportage, the synth-spiked sugar rushes of the Anniversary and the Get Up Kids, but also previously canonical touchstones that have become relegated to Boomerism nostalgia: the Beach Boys, the Clash, and Abbey Road. After the beer-hoisting nostalgia of “Blast Damage Days,” WORRY. unexpectedly (and hilariously) hits double time and tries to cram Rosenstock’s entire discography into a Side B medley, breathlessly running through Twista-paced spitfire punk, 30-second blasts of D-beat hardcore and an unashamedly infectious ska song.WORRY. is rife with similarly invigorating and wildly unfashionable touches—the Reggie and the Full Effect-style electropop intro of “Festival Song,” his voice cracking on the line, “So we made out foooooor the entire ride” like drunken Rivers Cuomo karaoke. “I wanna listen to the Cribs my dear, while we make out in your car,” he sings on “Pash Rash.” Among other things, Rosenstock is mounting a rousing defense of genre—“Stop sneering at our joy like it’s some careless mistake,” he snarls on “We Begged 2 Explode,” where a swaying piano ballad erupts into a kitchen-drinking singalong at a house party.  Punk usually has to sound serious to be taken seriously, and WORRY. is stuffed with so with many sugarcoated melodies it’s almost headache-inducing. Yet there isn’t a single insubstantial lyric here: it’s a record about New York gentrification, the internet, police brutality, liberal guilt, DIY idealism—crucial subject matter that typically inspire chin-stroking appreciation or eye-rolls because of their self-serious delivery.  Instead, WORRY. is an absolute blast and its heaviest stories are presented as some of the most devastating breakup songs of the past year. “Staring Out the Window at Your Old Apartment” plays on the “Is She Really Going Out With Him?” trope: “Someone hung a decorative surfboard up where your records and movies belong,” Rosenstock yells, but they still can’t hide the cracks in the wall that the landlord was never going to fix and the tacky renovations that followed. “You’ve got nowhere to go now,” he moans, in a lyric that exhibits scorn-free empathy for New Yorkers and the shitholes they’ve somehow been been priced out of. Rosenstock fondly reminisces over drinking tallboys by the water on “Wave Goodnight to Me,” written in memory of shuttered Death By Audio (and accompanied by a dead-on video). “I wish it didn’t hurt. I wish I didn’t care,” he brays, knowing that all DIY spaces are living on borrowed time and this one would eventually become the new Vice office: “They spent the last five years, yelling, ‘Come on! Come on! Come on! Get out of here!’”   Much of WORRY. is put in this “us vs. them” battleground, but Rosenstock isn’t a scold—he realizes you might not figure out you’re them until it’s too late. “Festival Song” takes easy licks at  “dorm room” music, “sweatshop denim jackets,” “department store crust punk chic,” and, well, you name it: “They wouldn’t be your friend if it wasn’t worth it/If you didn’t have something they could take.” His ire isn’t just limited to AEG and Live Nation pumping more hot air into a bubble that already burst, or Funyuns sponsoring whatever the hell this is. WORRY. was fittingly released right in the middle of October; it began with the NFL “going pink” as a meek gesture towards women jersey-buyers while treating domestic violence cases with less gravity than touchdown celebrations, and ended with Twitter shuttering Vine, a seemingly utopian mode of expression that in reality repeatedly exploited people of color (and still didn’t make a dime). As much as WORRY. deals in financial insecurity—the #1 worry of all—it speaks to the unshakable notion that American society is one giant game of big-bank-take-little-bank and we’re all “born as a data mine for targeted marketing,” discarded when we’re no longer in a demographic worth exploiting. Needless to say, it's become even more resonant in the past month.If this all sounds exhausting, well—would WORRY. live up to its name if it wasn’t? But there’s something reassuring about worry, how it is inextricable from daily existence, how it can reveal what’s actually meaningful when total nihilism is always a tempting option. Dropped in the middle of Rosenstock’s surveys of urban cultural decline, “I Did Something Weird Last Night” turns out to be the neurotic punk’s answer to “It Was a Good Day”—“I made out in the van with a girl I like/We were kinda drunk but it seemed alright,” Rosenstock yelps, explaining the title and returning to his apartment, sleeping through classes the next day and wondering when he’ll ever see her again. It’s a beautifully written song about the brief moments when irrational, giddy emotion can shout down the Voice of Worry and allow good things to happen despite everything—and also about the way people can talk themselves out of good things immediately afterwards once worry returns: “if I see you soon, will you want to see me?”; “I hope I’m not reading into this too much, it’s a kiss.”Rosenstock wrote “I Did Something Weird Last Night” about his girlfriend at the time, who is now his wife; the album’s cover art is taken from their wedding photos. But at the time, he admits, “I was preoccupied with how the magic would end/Because nothing intangible remains sustainable/Hope is a scheme.” It ties into the worry that pervades every interaction on this record, whether it’s with peers, corporations, political causes, anything—if you actually give a shit, have expectations and get your hopes up, you’re going to get played for a sucker. But later on, he shouts WORRY.’s most cathartic and reassuring line and like most others, if you’re not paying attention, you might miss what this album is really about: “Love is worry.”Listening to a Kristin Hersh album is like receiving, unfiltered, a direct feed of someone’s thoughts, with all the internal symbols, memories, private jokes intact before they apply all the translation and explanation and interpretation to the outside world. One gets the sense she’s still trying to sort through it all herself. For this reason, her music inevitably is called “abstract”; it’s an understandable reaction, but totally inaccurate. Kristin Hersh writes in specifics. Her memoir Rat Girl—alternately titled Paradoxical Undressing, a typically allegorical reference to hypothermia patients stripping off their clothes even as they freeze to death—sheds light on a couple dozen of her and Throwing Muses’ tracks. Her songs are full of references to her own material,anecdotes that slip out in interviews and on stage, blunt and hyper-specific wisecracks. Singer-songwriters, particularly women, are often accused of writing confessional material even (especially?) when they’re not, but Hersh’s material generally is. “I haven’t got the kind of brain to invent anything, so I just write the stuff down that happens,” she told Soundblab. “The things that happened are so bizarre, you can’t make those things up.” Wyatt at the Coyote Palace (named for one of her sons) is a typically personal and idiosyncratic affair. Like all her solo and Throwing Muses studio releases since 2010’s Crooked, Wyatt at the Coyote Palace is accompanied by a book of essays and artwork: less commentary on the tracks, and more another set of puzzle pieces to put together. (As well as a recipe for “hooker gazpacho.”) Like 1999’s Sky Motel, the sonics are rich; in addition to acoustic guitar, Hersh plays bass, drums, piano, horns, and cello, and engineer Steve Rizzo helps make it among her slickest-sounding recordings. After five years of tweaking results, she builds many of the arrangements to the beefiness of a typical Muses track; others are interspersed with muffled field recordings, an effect like hearing songs through mental fog. Like the Throwing Muses comeback album Purgatory/Paradise, the album is fragmentary and self-referential; songs reappear throughout the album in reprises, or reworks of and callbacks to past material.And like her 2001 solo effort Sunny Border Blue, the album is viscerally preoccupied with loss: “I'm so fucking tired of dissolution,” Hersh says in “Sun Blown.” Sometimes it’s general loss—the running joke throughout the album’s accompanying essays is Hersh and her bandmates’ brushes with death, both funny and sneakily serious (a fair amount of essays end in the hospital). A few years ago Hersh divorced from her husband of 25 years. It’s crept into all her work since—last year’s book Don’t Suck Don’t Die started out as a eulogy for singer-songwriter Vic Chesnutt but became a concurrent eulogy for the two songwriters’ marriages. But “Sun Blown” is perhaps the most explicit she's been: “The bailing mate dance, failing patience, fool's silver...” Like most of Hersh’s imagery, it’s not oblique at all when you get the reference: in this case, silver being the traditional 25th anniversary gift. The verse appears as a refrain throughout the album: leading into “Green Screen” and its descending counterpoint of a melody: “Red skin blackening, what is happening? The Art of Kissing, the heart of missing you.” Unsurprisingly, this is heavy listening. “Shaky Blue Can,” “Shotgun” (reminiscent of “Terra Nova”) and “Secret Codes” are up there with “Listerine” and “Flooding” as among the most fragile material Hersh has recorded. But her work is always threaded through with levity; these songs resist easy classification. “Detox” breaks through into anger—confrontational lyrics, distorted guitar solo—but the almost poppy “Wonderland” recalls the Muses’ midcareer singles; “Hemingway’s Tell” could easily be adapted into one. For every bracing line like “everyone like me’s a dead man,” there’s a gnomic one-liner like “Incense, strawberry candles and soap—way to butcher a street.” The former track, “Killing Two Birds,” is deceptively cheery—the essay accompanying it sets it during a teenage coke-fueled jog. The latter, “Between Piety and Desire” (like Purgatory/Paradise, a play on street names) becomes a “we don’t like the shit, ‘cause we belong in it.” The “we” is key. As memoirs, her albums are so intensely personal it’s little wonder she’s amassed a cult fanbase (and cadre of crowdfunders); as art, they’re arguments for the value of unapologetic individuality. The past twenty five years haven’t exactly been kind to Metallica. Ever since their mainstream-rock apotheosis on 1991’s Metallica, they’ve faced a quarter-century losing streak: the bloated hard rock of Load, Reload, and Garage Inc., the snoozy live album-cum-orchestral-experiment S&M, the migraine-inducing ineptitude of St. Anger, and the recycled rage of Death Magnetic. In 2011, they teamed up with Lou Reed for Lulu, a collaborative concept album regarded by many as music’s answer to The Room—if Tommy Wiseau’s classic was twice as ambitious and half as competent—and the band’s undeniable low point (and that’s even with the tell-all masochism of 2003’s documentary Some Kind of Monster). Money, fame, age, a lack of passion: Critics have floated several culprits for the mediocrity of latter-day Metallica. But as drummer Lars Ulrich suggested in a recent Rolling Stone interview, the wellspring of the band’s foibles also forms the basis of Metallica writ large. “The thing that I love about Metallica is that we’re very impulsive,” Ulrich said, before tacking on a subtle mea culpa: “That impulsivity occasionally bites us in the ass, because we jump before we know where we're landing.”And so, five years after hooking up with Lou, and eight years after their last album proper, Metallica have taken yet another leap with Hardwired...to Self-Destruct, a two-disc collection demarcated not by a leap into the unknown, but into the halcyon days of their youth nearly three decades ago during thrash’s primordial period, when “impulsivity” amounted to unpredictable fretwork, breakneck rhythms, and discarded pretenses. Like Death Magnetic, the record attempts a self-conscious return to form; the only difference is that this time the band sound like they’re actually trying, and–dare I say it–maybe even having a bit of fun. Hardwired...to Self-Destruct is a rare Metallica album without any Kirk Hammett songwriting credits, a  shift owed not to Some Kind of Monster-type bickering, but flat-out carelessness: The guitarist lost an iPhone containing roughly 250 riffs, leaving him with little to contribute to the think tank by the time Metallica began cutting the album. Temporarily demoted from puppet master to personnel, Hammett readily embraces–relishes, even–his role as primary ambassador for Metallica nostalgia. Hardwired… stands as the guitarist’s most extensive show of muscle since the self-titled days. From the soaring, bluesy triplets on “Atlas, Rise!” to the fleet-footed stampedes driving “Spit Out the Bone,” his playing strikes a winning compromise between precision and wildness, lending the otherwise one-dimensional mix (undermined primarily by the anemic drum tracking, which renders Ulrich’s bass kicks little more than footsie taps) some welcome textural spontaneity.As for spontaneity on a broader level—don’t head into Hardwired... hoping for progressive surprises or unanticipated turns. Its twelve songs–the vast majority of which extend well past the five-minute mark–fall into two categories: galloping nods to Ride the Lightning, of which the first disc is primarily composed, and doomier mid-tempo cuts à la Sabbath, which make up the bulk of the second. The LP’s highlights—“Hardwired,” “Moth Into Flame,” “Atlas, Rise!” all fall into the former camp, front-loading the record with fire. The second disc, by contrast, is a slog through nondescript, uniform chug, devoid of dynamics or instrumental nuance: “Confusion”’s dull roar proves practically indistinguishable from the slow-churning gyre of “ManUNkind” or “Here Comes Revenge,” and the clunky mainframe of “Murder One” borders on incoherent. Fortunately, they finish strong with “Spit Out the Bone,” a galvanizing, hyper-speed premonition of a world razed to the ground by man’s greed for shiny playthings (like, say, Hammett’s iPhone): “Plug into me and terminate/Accelerate, Utopian solution/Finally cure the Earth of Man.” A little less than three minutes in, the band automize fiercely, careening off the leaden path into a pummeling breakdown unheard since the glory days.  Elsewhere, James Hetfield redeems himself as Metallica’s growling figurehead with his strongest work in decades. The band’s 2014 tribute medley to fallen star Ronnie James Dio (which appears on the deluxe edition of Hardwired…) has clearly left a lasting impression on the 53-year-old, vocally and lyrically: whereas past releases found Hetfield howling the blues and roaringly introducing himself as literal furniture, Hardwired… marks a return to the matter-of-fact, staccato doomsday proselytizing of the band’s heyday. When he barks “We’re so fucked/Shit out of luck,” on the title track, teeth bared, fists clenched, we feel the pulse of his reckless youth ever-so-slightly—and for a second, the multi-millionaire feels like one of us, shaking in timely trepidation at the realization of the world’s greatest fears. And yet, even as he manages to rein in the cringeworthy wailing exhibited on St. Anger and the Load albums, he can’t resist backsliding into melodrama—obnoxiously extending out his syllables on “Now That We’re Dead” (“Now that we’re dead my DEEE-AHH we can be TOGETH-AHH”)–and on “Dream No More,” letting out a grunge-era whine that sounds like a failed impersonation of late legend Scott Weiland. Make no mistake—Hardwired... is easily Metallica’s best album since 1991’s landmark self-titled LP, a victory on par with Weezer’s White Album for comeback of the year. But as was the case with Cuomo and company, the album fails to convince non-diehards what, exactly, we look for from Metallica these days. Even after repeat listens, one can’t shake the feeling that in 2016, the legends’ students have become their teachers in terms of both sheer volume and political gravitas; those looking for fresh thrash, in its purest, most primal form are better off listening to the likes of Vektor, Power Trip, or Iron Reagan, who wave the torch of their forebears with considerably more gusto. Still, the band couldn’t return at a better time: when you flip on the news and see a narcissistic, trigger-fingered, despotic cheetoh at the podium—a Metallica song come to life—there’s no denying that the accessible aggro makes for a surprisingly potent balm, not to mention an enjoyable form of escapism. Porter Ricks, the duo of Andy Mellwig and Thomas Köner, weren’t around for long, but they left an indelible stamp on the legacy of what came to be known as dub techno. Ironically, there was never very much dub in their work—not in the way that you could hear it ricocheting through the work of their colleagues Basic Channel, for instance, upon whose Chain Reaction label Porter Ricks released their debut album, in 1996. In Basic Channel’s music, dub is a root, transplanted from Jamaica, that will eventually branch into the full-scale reggae of their later Rhythm & Sound project. In Porter Ricks’ music, dub is less a root than a route, a way of tracing the path a sound can travel through the convoluted guts of the recording studio. In Porter Ricks’ short, largely bulletproof catalog—save for a few exploratory detours on their second album, into hip-hop and Chicago house, that probably would have been better left untaken—drum machines are run through maze-like circuits until nothing remains but the infrared signature they have left in their wake. Their commitment to conjuring whole worlds out of little more than crackle and echo cast a long shadow, even though they put the project on hold after three short years. Without Porter Ricks, it’s hard to imagine Pole, Shackleton, Burial, or any number of artists working in the most densely crosshatched corners of electronic music. Their last album was 1999’s Symbiotics, a split LP with Techno Animal (the industrial duo of Kevin Martin, later known as the Bug, and Justin K. Broadrick, a veteran of a host of bands like Napalm Death, Godflesh, and Ice) on which their gravelly sound came to resemble something alive and malevolent, their synths’ jagged waveforms glinting like the teeth of a snarling animal.On their first new work in 17 years, not much has outwardly changed—and really, that’s the best possible scenario. When they called it quits, they were still in the process of pushing their sound forward, so for them to pick up where they left off is a welcome development. Shadow Boat consists of just three tracks, but they cover a considerable amount of ground. “Harbour Chart” creeps ahead at 60 beats per minute, faint kick and hi-hat all but subsumed in a maelstrom of foghorns and static. “Bay Rouge” is faster, a brisk andante of glancing chords and metallic textures. The timing of the release couldn't be more perfect, given the way the track's movements mimic kicking up piles of dry autumn leaves; the whole thing is crisp, chilly, and brooding. “Shadow Boat” is the longest, quickest, and most intense of the bunch, a headlong tumble into a wind-tunnel rave, its synths rattling like a broken screen.Porter Ricks always excelled at sketching out sweeping, subaquatic expanses—ironically, their name comes from a character on the 1960s television series Flipper, a children’s show about a dolphin, even though there’s nothing cuddly about their music—and that continues to be the case here; the sense of space suggested by all three tracks is immense, practically unbounded. For years, most dub techno records have concerned themselves with nothing more than dub techno itself, but Shadow Boat tackles bigger ideas: Its main subject is the interplay of uncontrollable forces. All three tracks, balancing four-to-the-floor beats with unpredictable explosions of sandblasted tone, explore the tension between steadiness and turmoil. On the one hand, the certainty of timekeeping; on the other, things ripped loose from their fixtures. (“Shadow Boat” would have made a great soundtrack to Alfonso Cuarón’s Gravity, playing the regularity of the spacecraft’s orbit against its spectacularly violent pulverization.) Ultimately, it’s not about chaos, exactly, but something like it: unpredictable, dubwise chain reactions that leave us cowed and awestruck—patterns whose complexity we can scarcely begin to apprehend.“ring spiel” tour ’95 captures one night in a superstar tour that assembled in support of the legendary Mike Watt’s  first solo album, Ball-Hog or Tugboat?  The former-Minutemen bass player turned fIREHOSE band leader gathered an insane and unlikely roster of alternative-rock superstars to not only support his album, but follow him on tour. Evan Dando, Kathleen Hanna, Ad-Rock and Mike D, Eddie Vedder, the Kirkwood brothers, Dave Pirner, Dave Grohl and Krist Novoselic, J Mascis, Nels Cline, half of Sonic Youth, and Mark Lanegan— these are just a few of the names in the long, long credits list. The title of the live record, recorded at the Metro in Chicago on May 6, 1995, references Watt’s concept of Ball-Hog or Tugboat? as being a wrestling match, where each group of musicians “got in the ring” with Watt.The touring band for “ring spiel” would end up being Grohl, Vedder, Pat Smear, and William Goldsmith, freshly ex-Sunny Day Real Estate and newly christened Foo Fighter. Opening were Hovercraft, the multi-media project helmed by Beth Liebling (whose husband happened to be Vedder) and the then-fledgling Foo Fighters. The tour was run according to Watt’s ‘we jam econo’ ethos from back in the Minutemen days; there were no fancy tour buses, no blacked-out windows; everyone was in a van, driving themselves to gigs, 31 shows in 42 days, the kind of thing that Watt could do in his sleep. The kids, although they were more famous, needed to keep up.The tickets were sold as a Mike Watt show, and as the liner notes (written by Michael Azerrad) point out, promoters were under strict instructions to not use Grohl or Vedder to promote the tour. But the jig was up, not because of local promoters trying to sell tickets, but because of fan networks on the internet. The Nirvana, Pearl Jam and even Foo Fighters fan bases were already well-entrenched, and word travelled fast, via Usenet and BBS and listserv. Then MTV showed up to a gig and poked their nose around, and any pretense of subterfuge was gone. Vedder could wear a floppy hat and drum in back of Hovercraft’s video projections all he wanted to, but the remaining shows, all in theaters and clubs, far below Pearl Jam or Nirvana capacities, sold out quickly. This was undoubtedly bittersweet: on the one hand, getting Watt in front of a larger audience was surely part of the point of the parade of stars on the record; on the other, the star power's ability to hang back in the shadows was gone, the Halloween costume (in the case of Vedder, a wig) removed.But the newfound attention didn’t distract the band from the task at hand: the show. “ring spiel” tour ’95 catches the band about halfway through the outing, and they’re tight and cohesive: for all of the econo ethic of the tour, it’s their hard-earned experience of the musicians that makes them tremendous. As a concert package, it was a great lineup: Hovercraft’s psychedelic shimmer as an amuse-bouche, followed by the explosive energy of the early Foo Fighters, and then the journeyman punk rock stylings of Mr. Watt and his group. The set, as represented here on the live album, was constructed from eight of the 17 songs on the record, along with well-chosen covers of songs by the Minutemen, fIREHOSE, Madonna, Blue Oyster Cult, Daniel Johnston, and others.The 16-song set veers around punk and country and country-punk, as well as flat-out pop (“Piss-Bottle Man,” improbably enough), and it’s tight and well-sequenced and varied in texture, just like a package-tour set needs to be. Watt had fIREHOSE fans and his credentials from his days in Minutemen were unquestionable, but you don’t assemble a roster of high-powered guests for your record to fade into oblivion. Hopefully, a kid who liked the Lemonheads or the Red Hot Chili Peppers, or never got to see Nirvana would come check out the album or the tour, and become a fan of Mike Watt. Or so that was the thought. The songs from Ball-Hog… absolutely hold their own against the rest of the material. “Forever...One Reporter’s Opinion” maintains the urgency of the Minutemen original, Pat Smear on lead vocals sounding like he wrote it himself. “Chinese Firedrill” pulls straight from the Flying Burrito heart of California folk rock with no irony. “E-Ticket Ride” has a jazz-like energy, with both Grohl and Goldsmith on drums, complementing each other seamlessly as though they’d been playing together forever.“Against the ’70s” would end up being the most well-known song from the record, because it was a duet with the then-reclusive Eddie Vedder. Later in the set, Vedder has a solo turn where he breaks out what would become a new Pearl Jam song: “Habit” would see the light of day on 1996’s No Code. Stripped down to essentials and anchored by Watt’s fat, fluid notes, “Habit” feels like it belongs here as much as anything else in the set.The encores are fun: “The Red and the Black” by Blue Oyster Cult, who were kissing cousins on the edge of punk, and an old Watt/Minutemen love, becomes a pneumatic drill when in the hands of these guys, with Grohl taking lead guitar. But the real esoteric number is the Madonna cover, a Ciccone Youth special interpretation of “Secret Garden” from Erotica, sung with love and camp by Pat Smear, powered only by Watt and Goldsmith, not that far away from the original arrangement. At their best, live albums capture not just a concert performance, but also document the energy and the context around the music. “ring spiel” tour ’95 manages to accomplish all of the above; it’s a nice time capsule if you were there, and it’s a great document to have if you weren’t, commemorating early years of musicians who are now canonic. At one point, Watt admonishes what were undoubtedly a disproportionate amount of amateur crowd-surfers: “Do you like those people rolling all over your heads?” (The crowd responds with a unanimous “No.”) “Then why don’t we give it a rest. Have to have your old man come up here and act like a fucking cop, to tell you that shit,” Watt says, the disgust obvious in his voice. If nothing else, this tour is a tribute to his instincts as a band leader, and a scene elder. He might have had some trepidation on starting over after ending fIREHOSE, but this record proves that he never should have doubted his instincts onstage.Fingerpicked acoustic guitar is a hit-or-miss proposition: When it works, the rolling, repetitive figures it produces can be hypnotic. But it’s easy for even a great player to drift into auto-pilot. The antidote seems pretty simple—pause, stretch, slow, or otherwise disrupt your habits—but that doesn’t mean it’s easy. Muscle memory is hard to kick.In all of his work so far, guitarist Daniel Bachman has avoided the traps of robotic fingerpicking. But on Daniel Bachman—his eighth solo album, and second self-titled one—he does so with a new level of sophistication. It’s his most thoughtful release to date, filled with mindful reflection and confident patience. Even during his snappiest songs, Bachman takes time to consider where he is and where he’s going. When his pace starts to rush, he pulls back, ringing out a long chord or even stopping completely to avoid just going with the flow.The two clearest examples are the tracks that open each side of Daniel Bachman, both called “Brightleaf Blues.” In each, he uses sustained tones rather than flurries of string-picking to build atmosphere. The first half of the album’s opener is a high-pitched drone, followed by gradual strums and plucks that are more about exploration than exposition. Drone is the also backbone of the second “Brightleaf Blues,” humming in the background as Bachman feels his way through open-ended guitar figures. He achieves the same effect without drone in “A Dog Named Pepper,” progressing and retreating at intervals so well-timed they seem elemental, as if his fingers were guided by the moon and the tides.An album of only halting, measured music would likely make Bachman’s thoughtful playing seem flat, so he wisely includes some tunes made in a more traditional early-blues style. The raga-like “The Flower Tree,” the twangy “Wine and Peanuts,” and the chord-bending “Watermelon Slices on a Blue Bordered Plate” all fit this bill well, creating lively swing while still allowing Bachman room to contemplate and reset. Most song titles on Daniel Bachman include images from nature, suggesting this album is environmentally aware—not in the eco-activist sense, but in the sense of Bachman taking stock of his surroundings. He’s almost literally stopping to smell the roses, and the result is an album about growth and development, about the virtues of taking your time rather than the crutch of constantly sprinting forward. In the process, it advances Bachman’s oeuvre significantly.The past few years have been both a bounty and something of an endurance test for Autechre fans. This past May, the duo of Rob Brown and Sean Booth released elseq 1-5, over four hours of new material. It earned comparisons to dumping off a bag of clothes at a second hand store and a Netflix show binge. That followed on the heels of last year’s AE_LIVE, which was over nine hours of live shows and 2013’s Exai, which ran for two hours (though still under the length of a modern superhero film). It sounds daunting—and yes, what the duo conjures up sounds daunting—as Autechre is shorthand for a type of difficult strain of electronic music once deemed “intelligent dance music.” There’s a good chance the word “algorithm” will be used when writing about their music, and despite their longevity, they remain at the vanguard, the Cecil Taylors of their field.But for all that impenetrability, there's a lifelong friendship and dialogue that takes place between the two, regardless of the fact they now live in separate cities, building and swapping MAX patches from a distance. It’s a dialogue begun back in the late ‘80s, when they were electro-obsessed teens coming up in Manchester, swapping ideas and tracks on cassette tapes, jamming on analog synths and drum machines in their flats. It’s a dialogue that you can parse on their earliest albums, Incunabula and Amber, finally reissued on vinyl after they’ve changed hands online for three-digit sums. That complex and private language is evident from the start, situating Brown and Booth as the Poto and Cabengo of techno.“Eggshell,” from their 1993 debut Incunabula, subtly reworks “The Egg,” a track from the epochal Artificial Intelligence comp that forever saddled them with the “intelligent dance music” tag . The Incunabula track locates a purgatory between the graffiti-friendly snare and hi-hats and disarmingly gorgeous, slow-moving synth line that evolves almost without notice behind the beat. The landscapes they evoke can seem post-industrial and dystopian, but the chord progression of “Kalpol Introl” still feels melancholic and definitely human. And while its approximately 75-minute length is unwarranted—the acid squelches of “Windwind” exhaust with their 11-minute runtime—there are both time-stamped presets as well as plenty of clues as to their evolution embedded in the album.An early highlight, “Bike,” finds Autechre at their most songful, the bolts-on-concrete sounds of the 808s giving way to a beautiful ambient passage before that metallic beat returns. Even odder is “Basscadet,” a fan-favorite hit of sorts back in 1994. Built from what sounds like a hand drum tattoo and featuring a cheeky vocal sample saying “I don’t have any idea ‘bout what’s going on,” it features the abrasive electronic tones and scoured-metal aesthetic that would soon become the keystone to their future work.Next year’s Amber might most closely resemble Aphex Twin’s Selected Ambient Works 85-92, but even then it shows them subtly begin to slide away from their techno roots. Some of their most ambient tracks are here, though it also finds them favoring darker, more industrial timbres that earned those early Cabaret Voltaire comparisons. It’s still disarming to see them use real words like “Glitch” and “Montreal” rather than the semantic jumble that would soon define their tracks. “Foil” builds with a beat that sounds like a whip against the titular material, the turbid washes decidedly more malicious than on their debut. The synth melodies of “Slip” haven’t aged very well, and the sharper aspects of “Glitch” and “Piezo” feel dulled and gentle in hindsight, knowing just what nasty and brutish sounds they would soon wring out of their gear.What makes Amber fascinating to revisit decades on is to hear vestigial organs and sonic cul-de-sacs that Autechre would bin almost immediately after. Brown would look back and deem these melodic bits “cheesy” but if anything, it proves that at one point the duo was human after all. “Silverside” might be Autechre’s most haunted five minutes, even if the surge of orchestral soundtrack strings and distorted voice are two tricks that we’d never hear again. “Nine” might be the closest they ever got to the placid sounds of new age while “Further,” with its slow heaving minor key swells are as emotive as anything Autechre ever released. The flickering lullaby melody and spare pads of “Yulquen” reveal a soft, contemplative side that few could even identify as an Autechre track.With 1995’s Tri Repetae, Autechre obliterated all that they—and most of their Warp roster mates—had done before. Rather than cut away vestigial parts, they scoured off all flesh and “cheesy” bits entirely, trash-compacted their hard drives and went full cyborg instead. While Aphex Twin used a dentist drill-high frequency to wheeze atop his single “Ventolin” earlier that year, Autechre made it their entire aesthetic, reconfiguring each component of their productions with that same level of sonic intensity. From the deep, sawing sinewave and rockslide of low tones that open “Dael” to the metallic thrums and chilling hiss of closer “Rsdio,” Tri Repetae served as Autechre’s superhero origin story, revealing a monstrous new power while also obliterating any trace of their previous selves. Rather than be able to trace the twisted metal of Tri Repetae to old Detroit techno singles and Mantronik sides, the lineage goes directly to Merzbow’s white-knuckle noise and the hammered metal of Einstürzende Neubauten. They’d push into more experimental and complex music for the next twenty years and never quite be as gentle or linear as those first two efforts.The pewter sleeve bereft of any markings, the images of metal shafts and casings suggest that the humans behind Autechre were replaced not with robots but rather old radiators instead. Since then, experimental and dance artists alike—be they on labels like PAN, Tri Angle or Editions Mego—have absorbed certain aspects of Autechre’s sound. Whether you go for Oneohtrix Point Never, Arca, Holly Herndon, Russell Haswell, or Powell, they inhabit a world that Autechre helped make conceivable, so that even the cold metallic tones of their third album have somehow warmed with time. The bass growl that lurches forth on “Clipper” now feels triumphant rather than menacing, the whinnying frequencies of “Rotar” slowly tease out a melodic line. The spaceship vibrations of “Eutow” bears a low-rider beat at its center and the factory clatter of “Gnit” still reveals something quirky behind all the machinations. Revisiting Tri Repetae twenty-one years later is like returning to a planet previously filled with sulfuric acid clouds, volcanoes and liquid mercury pools. A hostile, post-human sound at the time of its release, it’s now startling to find residents living and thriving there.The highlights from the meticulously recorded 2014 Body/Head live set at Big Ears selected for No Waves clock in all together at only 40 minutes, which is exactly the point at which those of us with punk training start to get restless beyond consolation in live settings. No Waves is, in its essence, tenuously and perfectly balanced between experimental challenge and punk efficiency. At first listen, it may seem wild and free; under deep scrutiny, it’s extremely artful, no moment out of place.This should come as little surprise to anyone familiar with either half of Body/Head, Bill Nace or Kim Gordon. Nace is an extraordinarily skilled improvisational guitarist who’s collaborated with contemporary greats like Chris Corsano, Jessica Rylan, Mats Gustafsson, Joe McPhee, Paul Flaherty, Bill Orcutt, Okkyung Lee—the list goes on. What remains audible through all of these disparate collaborations is his core skill—as are all titans of improvisation, he is highly adaptable, and above all, an excellent listener. His style is unmistakable, but he never forces his collaborators to bend to it. Instead, he stretches elastic, copper, and rough twine sounds around the structures his collaborators build; it’s magical to observe. Gordon, for her part, has a noted ear for breaking apart pop songcraft; in Sonic Youth, in Free Kitten, and with Body/Head, she’s always written bass and guitar lines that are as indelibly catchy as they are inscrutable. There’s always a delightfully missing hinge to what she builds, urging the listener to push open the door instinctively only to watch the entire frame crumble. Of the two shorter tracks, “Sugar Water” and “The Show Is Over,” only the latter has a studio counterpart, while “Abstract/Actress” takes two tracks from Body/Head’s debut, Coming Apart, and blurs them together into a thick, tense paste. If the versions of these songs on Coming Apart sometimes felt like never-ending spiral staircases from a surreal dreamscape, their mutated live representation paws the ground, less Escher-esque than Baba Yaga’s hut—dream gone nightmare; landscape gone mythic hell. The track takes up the bulk of the album, and yet it never becomes boring and never feels long. There are nods within to no-wave scrawl, to free jazz freakout, to pop hook, and to psychedelic drone. It’s exhilarating.“Sugar Water” is nothing short of beautiful, Nace’s and Gordon’s guitars delicately chiming together, their clangor blending smoothly into a murky dissonance, like church bells. Gordon’s voice twists over the top, wordless, serving as an instrumental tone unto itself, as she has often deployed it. “The Show Is Over” ping-pongs between placid ambience and blown-out, quick-strummed frenzy; Raymond Pettibon’s cover art (far from the gnarly punk line work he’s perhaps best known for, but congruent with his lifelong usage of greens, blues, and yellows, as well as his fat scroll-like brush technique) depicts a seemingly calm lake (the No Waves title, after all, is not just a play on a a genre name), and one may be reminded of that art particularly by this song; how quickly the wind can kick up, how quickly a fresh-water monster could emerge.The dynamism of all three tracks is another of No Waves’ greatest strengths; where Body/Head’s studio work is all matte-finished and fascinatingly horizontal, here their interplay stands up in full, palpable relief. The recording retains the crackling live energy and natural ease of the set without sacrificing clarity. No Waves stands as a memorable document on its own and a hopeful harbinger for new material to come.There is a surprising amount of music inspired by particle accelerators. Techno-classical producer Kate Simko wrote an album about the one at Fermilab, located outside her hometown of Chicago. Jazz pianist Al Blatter once improvised along to a “sonification” program that translates data collected by the Large Hadron Collider into music on stage at the Montreux Jazz Festival, where CERN, the multinational research organization that runs the LHC, has held several artist workshops. Sound artist Bill Fontana created a piece that used the LHC itself as an instrument, refracting sound generated by its own data. The LHC and Fermilab have each inspired their own not-particularly-good nerdcore rap anthem, complete with inter-lab beef. So His Name Is Alive isn’t breaking new conceptual ground by taking the LHC as the inspiration for their new album Patterns of Light, but where they’ve taken that influence is entirely uncharted territory. Previous works in strange little niche have crossed multiple genre lines, but there’s always been a consistent aesthetic: clean-lined, blippy, and serene, like what you’d expect to find in a PBS documentary, or what you might imagine a massively powerful and complex piece of technology might listen to for fun. His Name Is Alive mastermind Warren Defever has gone pretty much the exact opposite way, filtering the idea of the LHC through the stonier side of ’70s rock.Defever has spent the past 25 years picking a strange course through a field of genres that up until now has touched on goth, folk, R&B, noise, and chamber pop, but even with all that range, Patterns of Light feels like an outlier. Even if you heard 2014’s Tecuciztecatl, where the band merged shoegazey noise with vintage prog, you’ll still probably be caught off guard when the album opens with a track that–apart from the hypnotic multitrack cooing of vocalist-keyboardist Andrea Morici–sounds exactly like Dio-era Black Sabbath. It’s by far the heaviest, shreddiest, most aggressive thing Defever’s ever done, and, as far as I can tell, entirely unlike any other music ever composed for CERN. The major difference is that past artists seem to have been inspired by the Large Hadron Collider’s earthly manifestation: the sleek lines of its beam-conducting apparatus, its intricate computer arrays, the pixelated action art of its data visualizations. Defever, on the other hand, considers it from a more cosmic perspective, which the LHC offers in abundance. After all, this is a machine that was built in order to rip the veil off the mechanisms of reality, one designed in search of something that’s often been called the “God particle.” It’s so powerful and strange that a lot of people seriously thought that it was going to destroy the universe when it was first powered up. Even after it’s been up and running for years without tearing apart the fabric of reality, people are still terrified of it.Patterns of Light runs on this occult energy. The lyrics—with their frequent invocations of witches, dragons, and the “light of creation”—often read like spells, where knives and sacrificial murder pop up next to dark matter and the standard model of particle physics. “Silver Arc Curving in the Magnetic Field” describes the LHC collider’s 17-mile-circumference circle like the ritual site of a new techno-pagan cult–just the latest iteration in a 3000-year-old tradition of earthworks inscribed into ancient Celtic land. It also helps Defever’s direction in genre-hopping make stronger thematic sense here than on other His Name Is Alive albums. Classic metal and prog—which the band expertly executes on cuts like “Black Wings” and “Demonmix”—have long served as vehicles for high-concept, bong-smacked, “whoa, man” philosophizing. The sunshiney psych-pop of “Calling All Believers” bears a strong resemblance to the Canadian band Klaatu’s new age-y 1976 hit “Calling Occupants of Interplanetary Craft,” while the pastoral folk of “Dragon Down” sounds like it could have been lifted from a private press LP recorded by a Californian hippie cult. A front-to-back listen through Patterns of Light can feel like a tour through all the places where pop radio and esoteric thought crossed paths during the ’70s, and a tribute to the ways both music and physics strive to explain a universe that can sometimes feel stubbornly unknowable.Over the course of their first four albums, Radian perfected a painterly approach to sound construction. What makes the instrumental Austrian trio exceptional is its ability to wrest seemingly endless possibilities by fine-tuning the grain of every sound. On their fifth album On Dark Silent Off, Radian take the tactile dimension of their music even further while also introducing groove and drama basically for the first time. On Dark Silent Off bristles with a passion that you don't hear on their back catalog. It's not like past Radian records are stiff, but the band always sounded slightly removed as it supplied you with a constant flow of sensory input. This time, they connect with your heart too.  On Dark Silent Off begins much as Radian's other albums do, with two minutes of instrumental textures building into a half-organic, half-synthetic hybrid: electric guitar chords strained through an amplifier, a bleeping electronic pulse, and drum sticks establishing a pattern on snare. As usual for them, the overall tone feels, if not cold, then at least impersonal, an exercise in modernist architecture that privileges audacity of form over comfort. This time, the band relied heavily on transducers to project sounds onto various surfaces, a process not unlike replaying tracks through an amp or studio monitor to increase the feeling of spatial dimension. When new guitarist Martin Siewert plays guitar chords, it feels like you can reach out and touch the grill covering on his amplifier. You can hear air moving behind Siewert and Brandlmayr's array of electronic noises. If the music on On Dark Silent Off had been painted on a canvas, you'd notice the detail in the brush strokes from twenty feet away. But right around the two-minute mark of album opener “Pickup Pickout,” Radian switch into an actual groove, like a post-rock interpretation of a techno banger. Out of nowhere, the music starts to pant, sweat, and move. The sudden rush of humanity is startling. The song ends with a repetitive, pulsing digital loop, and by that point Radian have covered more ground in one piece than they have on some of their entire past albums. In the same vein, a piece like “Recreate Loved Objects” unfolds like a suite, almost a mini-album unto itself, as its somber single-note guitar line traverses a shifting landscape of sounds. Suffice it to say the album doesn’t simply reward repeated listens, it demands them.  Radian's brand of art rock has always gone down surprisingly smooth in whole-album servings, but they've outdone themselves on every level here. More limber and fiery than ever, the band has risen out the experimental cul-de-sac with a riveting work that should appeal to both its expected audience and to new fans who might have otherwise dismissed this style of music as too antiseptic for their liking. Washington, DC exists in a constant ominous haze. It’s no secret that this environment has given rise to absolutely vital punk through grassroots oppositional music scenes, from Dischord post-hardcore forebears like Rites of Spring and Fugazi to the feminist Positive Force collective that fostered the East coast wing of riot grrrl. Sister Polygon, an eclectic record label run by the members of Priests, is helping to set up infrastructure for the latest wave. Their bands deploy many tactics: the confrontational urgency of Downtown Boys and Priests themselves, the tongue-in-cheek minimalism of Sneaks, the giddy polyphonics of Gauche. They all paint sonic critiques of broken systems and create effective models of resistance.Flasher, made up of Taylor Mulitz (bassist in Priests), Emma Baker, and Daniel Saperstein, is the latest to emerge. They take a moody post-punk approach, crafting introspective songs that speak to selfhood and sublimation. “What happens when the continuity of self and the worlds you come to depend on shatter?” Flasher told The Media in April upon releasing their debut self-titled cassette, which is now being re-released on vinyl. “We’re trying to explore new forms of resistance, where being yourself ceases to be a matter of reliability and instead leans into emerging, shifting, and unsustainable senses of self.” The trio’s previous project, Young Trynas, addressed some of these themes on their 2013 EP Probably Music, but on Flasher they’re silkier, more stylized, well-honed.Flasher’s airy melodic vocal hooks, layered over grungy instrumentation, earn comparisons to Goo-era Sonic Youth. The more relentless tracks, meanwhile, like “All Over,” recall the overdriven shoegaze of A Place to Bury Strangers. Call-and-response singing and classically ominous synths round out full, rich songs; each part sits perfectly in the mix. On the standout opener, “Tense,” a languid, taunting lead vocal faces off with another voice, which rattles out a laundry list of concerns: “The backseat/The answer/To society/Something greater/The body/Distant achievements/Further growth/Empty gesture.” Crashing waves of guitar nearly drown it out, but the bite of the words is persistent. “Tense” luxuriates in the tension between desire and responsibility.From there, the tracks are more high-octane, built around mantras of being and nothingness. “I’ll erase myself/To release myself” vows the chorus of “Erase Myself”; “Is this becoming/Or am I succumbing?” asks “Make Out.” The object of immersion is never named; it could be society, or coupling, or the scene. Instead, the focus is on the lure of being consumed, its dark seduction. Closer “Destroy” can be read as a display of sweetly heartsick longing—the chorus crooning, “Starting to realize/I just want to be your boy”—or as a self-conscious critique of that form of desire. “Go destroy your feelings,” Mulitz sings, “Make a little room for me.”Across Flasher, dissociative existential questions are countered by the visceral physicality of the songs. This places the trio squarely in the tradition of punk that articulates how politics imprint on the body. “Throw It Away” shakes with every drum kick and guitar screech, recalling the angst of other Polygon projects with the repetition of lines like, “With god as my witness/This world is a sickness” and “Why should I be thankful?” But for all the tension and darkness, there’s a real joy to Flasher—a knowing smile, a dream-pop slippage. It’s a fun listen that sounds like it was equally fun to make, which, after all the soul-searching, is a source of relief.Leonard Cohen appeared on seven of his album covers before 1988, always looking cooler and wiser than his listeners: he was the saturnine poet, the seductive man of the world. On the cover of I’m Your Man he looks better than ever, with his sunglasses and impeccable pinstripe suit—except that he’s eating a banana, the slapstick fruit. James Dean would not have looked cool eating a banana. Gandhi would not have looked wise. Cohen’s publicist Sharon Weisz snapped the picture at the video shoot for Jennifer Warnes’ version of “First We Take Manhattan” and thought nothing of it, but Cohen thought it summed up everything the album was saying about himself and the human condition: Just when you think you’ve got it all worked out, life hands you a banana.Cohen was 53 when he released the album that reinvented him musically, vocally, linguistically, temperamentally and philosophically. It quickly became his most successful record since his 1967 debut and many people’s favorite. In Sylvie Simmons’ Cohen biography, also called I’m Your Man, Black Francis says: “Everything that’s sexy about him was extra sexy, anything funny about him extra funny, anything heavy was extra heavy.” Triple-espresso Cohen. Six of these eight songs were career highlights that featured on “The Essential Leonard Cohen” and his 2008 comeback tour. Over the years, they have been consistently covered and quoted and folded into popular culture. Not a bad strike rate for an album that, according to Cohen, “broke down three or four times in the making of it.”Cohen was on his knees when he made I’m Your Man. His 1984 album Various Positions had revitalized his songwriting with his embrace of cheap synthesizers and contained “Hallelujah,” destined to become a modern standard, but it had been rejected by Columbia Records in the U.S. He was running out of money. Songwriting, never easy, had become “hard labor”—he had been struggling with “Anthem” and “Waiting for the Miracle” for years and wouldn’t nail them until his 1992 album The Future. Above (or below) all, he was poleaxed by depression, unable at one stage to get out of bed or answer the phone. He considered retiring and withdrawing to a monastery but he didn’t feel he had the spiritual mettle. He felt that the personality he had sustained for so many years—as an artist, lover, friend—was disintegrating. “My own situation was so disagreeable that most forms of failure hardly touched me,” he said. “That allowed me to take a lot of chances.”Cohen clawed back his self-respect by telling the truth. His account of writing “I Can’t Forget” reminds me of Hemingway’s solution to creative block: “All you have to do is write one true sentence. Write the truest sentence that you know.” Originally, the song was about the Jews’ exodus from Egypt but Cohen felt he lacked the religious conviction to sing it. “I couldn’t get the words out of my throat,” he said. So he sat down at the kitchen table, abandoned any pretense to wisdom and began to write one true verse, a twist on Kris Kristofferson’s “Sunday Mornin’ Comin’ Down”: “I stumbled out of bed/I got ready for the struggle/I smoked a cigarette/And I tightened up my gut.”The actress Rebecca De Mornay, who began dating Cohen after I’m Your Man, summarized his attitude at the time: “Let’s get down to the truth here. Let’s not kid ourselves.” The truth, as Cohen saw it, was bleak. He had reached the end of a period of spiritual inquiry. His investigations would resume during the ‘90s when he spent years studying with the Zen master Roshi on California’s Mount Baldy, but on I’m Your Man he had reached a conclusion about how the world worked, and it gives the album a wry fatalism. His capacity for action is circumscribed by forces beyond his control. He is chained to music (“Tower of Song”), or a woman (“I’m Your Man”) or the memory of a woman (“Ain’t No Cure for Love”) and there’s nothing he can do about it. Bob Dylan said that with Various Positions Cohen’s songs were becoming like prayers—“Hallelujah,” “If It Be Your Will”—but there are no prayers here, and nobody to answer them.To the extent that I’m Your Man is political—with its allusions to racism, inequality and the Shoah—it is the opposite of protest, because protest is futile here. The bomb has already dropped. The flood has occurred. The plague has arrived. The language of politics or religion or romance has lost its power to console or inspire. All that Cohen can do is describe the blasted terrain without flinching and find a way to inhabit it with some modicum of dignity. “I got some sense that the thing has been destroyed and is lost and that this world doesn’t exist, and this is the shadow of something, this is the fallout, the residue, the dust of some catastrophe, and there’s nothing to grasp onto,” said Cohen, demonstrating his ability to deliver an answer in an interview that’s as finely turned as a poem. The album describes the aftermath—a state beyond pessimism or anxiety or hope. “A pessimist is somebody who is waiting for the rain,” he said. “Me, I’m already wet.”I’m Your Man is the most fun you can have while being told that life is a terrible joke. Because Cohen is a published poet and novelist and a limited musician, his grasp of pop music is often underrated, but he was enough of an entertainer to realize that this lyrical pill would require a lot of sweetening in the studio. The album began to take shape when Jeff Fisher, a keyboardist whom he had met in Montreal, arranged “First We Take Manhattan.” Cohen felt that if these words were couched in “serious Leonard Cohen music,” then they would be intolerable for both him and the listener. The song needed cinematic scope (Fisher’s version reminded him of Ennio Morricone’s work with Sergio Leone) and a beat you could dance to. The synthesizer enabled him to write to rhythms he couldn’t play on the guitar but it also connected him to cities, modernity, the tempo of the street. Fisher’s version, which resembles a militarized Pet Shop Boys, convinced Cohen the album was possible.Then there’s the voice, which had acquired a morbid gravitas ideally suited to delivering hard truths but was not yet a midnight croak. Cohen shows considerable range here, executing each syllable with deadly precision on “First We Take Manhattan”; as intimate as a late-night phone call on the title track; a more ravaged version of his younger self on “Take This Waltz”; jaded and urbane on “Tower of Song.” His backing singers Jennifer Warnes and Anjani Thomas serve as confidants, accomplices, angels and hecklers, encircling that voice like garlands on a statue. Finally, and most importantly, there are jokes. It may be the humor of the gulag or the cancer ward—the black comedy of low expectations—but no less funny for that. “When things get truly desperate,” said Cohen, “you start laughing.”The only man of action on the record, the only optimist, is the deranged narrator of “First We Take Manhattan.” Cohen had become fascinated by extremist rhetoric, from the KKK to Hezbollah, because its “beautiful world of certainty of action” stood in exotic contrast to his own sense that the human condition is defeat and failure. (“Anthem,” which he attempted during the I’m Your Man sessions, would articulate the consolation embedded in his anti-utopian philosophy—“Forget your perfect offering/There is a crack in everything/That’s how the light gets in”—but not for another four years). The fanatic believes he knows exactly what needs to be done. The fanatic can always get out of bed. Obviously, Cohen didn’t endorse any of these ideologies, so he imagined a movement of one, leaving it unclear whether the narrator is an impotent fantasist or a genuine threat. The understanding of the mindset is chilling but, Cohen reasoned, “I’d rather do that with an appetite for extremism than blow up a bus full of schoolchildren.” Zack Snyder, in a rare instance of good taste and humor, deployed it at the end of Watchmen, where it speaks for the deranged utopianism of Ozymandias.I’m Your Man, which Cohen produced himself, has a reputation as Cohen’s synthesizer album, but each lyric demands a different setting. There’s a country song, a Casio blues number, a waltz, a Quiet Storm ballad and whatever the hell “Jazz Police” thinks it is. A friend of mine calls any near-masterpiece flawed by one outright howler a case of “Jazz Police Syndrome” and it’s hard to disagree, even if you accept Cohen’s intention to make “something quite wild and irresponsible,” inspired by hip-hop and the theme of a Pynchonesque “superagency” that secretly controls the world. Frenzied abandon isn’t one of Cohen’s natural modes, especially when it’s expressed through the medium of slap bass and stumbling drum machines. The joke fails to land.“Jazz Police” is the most extreme manifestation of Cohen’s dedication to the sound and the language of “the street.” He made the album in fragments, in Paris, Montreal and Los Angeles, a city that he felt was “really, truly an apocalyptic landscape.” I’m Your Man is his least spiritual, least poetic, least romantic album. It has no patience for beautiful abstractions. “Ain’t No Cure for Love” (its title inspired by L.A.’s AIDS crisis) and the title track take sentimental clichés—I’m addicted to love, I’ll do anything for love—to brutal extremes. Love is the monkey on his back and he’ll go to any lengths to appease it, even if it means erasing his identity. “I’m Your Man” fades out with Cohen still singing, as if he’s going to keep prostrating himself at the feet of the object of his desire until he gets an answer. There’s a very good chance she’s not listening.Cohen leaves the street just once, diverting all of his poetic energies into “Take This Waltz,” his lush version of Lorca’s 1930 poem “Little Viennese Waltz” that first came out in 1986 on the 50th anniversary of the poet’s death. He said that translating his favorite poet took him 150 hours and a nervous breakdown, which may not be hyperbole because it must have been a mammoth task to honor Lorca’s sinister dreamscape while thoroughly Cohenizing the language. Lorca’s striking image of a forest of dried pigeons becomes “a tree where the doves go to die”; the melancholy hallway becomes “the hallways where love’s never been.” Lorca wrote it during the year he spent in New York, and Cohen’s song retains that dance between the old world and the new as well as the one between love and death.If you had to boil I’m Your Man’s worldview down to just two songs, one would be “Everybody Knows,” a grim litany of human cruelty and injustice with a chorus like a Balkan wake. “It pushes things very, very far just to get a laugh,” he said. It’s been serially abused by posturing self-styled mavericks who miss the humor, from Christian Slater’s character in the 1990 teensploitation flick Pump Up the Volume to conspiracy theorist Alex Jones, but that’s not Cohen’s fault. He doesn’t valorize his cynicism or claim that it requires special insight. Everybody knows this stuff deep down, he’s saying. Let’s not kid ourselves. At a press conference in 2013, Cohen was asked by one earnest journalist what he thought about the state of the world. He paused and smiled and said: “Everybody knows.” Of course.The other keystone is “Tower of Song,” which suggests Beckett’s famous line, “I can’t go on; I’ll go on,” reworked as a stand-up comedy routine. “I was born like this/I had no choice/I was born with the gift of a golden voice” is the most famous of a string of very good jokes. Cohen laughed when he wrote that line: “a laugh that comes with the release of truth.” Elsewhere, he holds out the possibility that, despite all we’ve been told, things might not be as bad as he imagined: “There’s a mighty judgement coming but I may be wrong/You see you hear these funny voices/In the Tower of Song.” Even the music is comical, with its rinky-dink keyboard rhythm and faltering one-finger keyboard solo. On his comeback tour it functioned as both light relief and the key to his whole career—he recited the lyric when he was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2008. Here, its droll resignation steers the album away from futility at the last moment. This is Cohen climbing out of his depression by accepting his lot as a singer and writer—a lifelong resident in the tower he described as a combination of factory and bordello. Songwriting is how he makes himself useful. It’s not much, but perhaps it is enough. Right up until his death on November 7, at the age of 82, Cohen was a great believer in useful songs. He once told a story about a conversation that helped him summon the conviction to finish the album when he was in a trough of despair. A friend told him that her father, who also suffered from chronic depression, had recently had a dream that made him feel better. It was a dream about Cohen. “I don’t have to worry because Leonard is picking up the stones,” he told her, smiling. I’m Your Man gives the impression that Cohen took this responsibility very seriously. It’s not an uplifting album, but it’s a strangely reassuring one, because you feel that Cohen is working like a dog on the listener’s behalf to make the intolerable tolerable. Leonard is picking up the stones.Over the past four years, Tinashe, a 23-year-old former child actor turned singer, has been nudging the needle of R&B forward with a handful of moody and distinctive projects. Eschewing the glossy production and gospel-influenced, showboating singing style characteristic of traditional R&B, she wove a cocoon, leaning on woozy, atmospheric beats that nodded to chopped-n-screwed culture. Despite her movie-biz background and, yes, camera-ready face, however, she’s struggled to break through in the music industry. In an interview with xoNecole last year, Tinashe explained why she hadn’t been given much support.   “I think it comes from a place of there is only room for one. Or there is only room for two. … There is a Beyoncé, there is a Rihanna, there is Zendaya, there is a Jourdan Dunn. There is a Black girl in all of these positions and we don’t need another one. It’s just kind of ridiculous because there are like a hundred blonde, white actresses and leading ladies. There are a hundred rappers that all virtually look the same, sound the same, and dress the same and no one cares. But for some reason, when it comes to young women … There can’t be room [for us all]. There can’t be five Black girls winning.” There is truth to her response, especially in rap. As more and more promising female rappers pop up, from an industry standpoint there’s still Nicki Minaj and everyone else. But Tinashe’s music also has a somewhat reticent, inaccessible air to it, and her lyrics lack stickiness, which make holding the spotlight hard. Despite her best efforts—the choreographed shows, the sexy cover shoots, the collabs with bigger players like Chris Brown and Nick Jonas—and a warm critical reception (Aquarius, her 2014 debut studio album, ranked on many year-end lists, including Pitchfork’s)—she hasn’t quite become a “star.” She scored a mainstream smash with 2014’s “2 On,” but that might have been a fluke, owing more to the ubiquity of DJ Mustard’s club-ready beats and a stronger POV than Tinashe typically employs in her own slippery vision. Clearly, her team wants Tinashe to be a radio artist (see her addition on a new version of Britney’s sharp “Slumber Party”), but she is making much smarter music than “2 On” or “All Hands on Deck.” In fact, if claiming a spot on heavy rotation playlists is the goal, she might be making music that’s too good, as evinced by her latest project, Nightride.  Delays of Joyride, her upcoming sophomore album, and fuzziness over exactly what Nightride is—a mixtape for sale, a companion piece to Joyride?—hint to her team’s confusion of how to market the excellent yet not-easily-defined music she’s creating. For example, “Energy,” the mystical Mike WiLL Made-It track, is one of the best songs of the year and it didn’t even make the cut here.  Album opener “Lucid Dreaming” is a soothing balm, its wooden chimes evoking the calm of savasana. However, Nightride’s first half is heavily weighted with somber ballads, and the first 25 minutes begin to drag, with the exception of the taut “Company,” which skitters and flits. But from that point on, Nightride sounds fascinating and, while polished, less sleek and cold than the title suggests. It has more of an ominous, broken-down carnival vibe. Tinashe is making some very weird music here (she’s not alone in that, of course—Sevyn Streeter, Dawn Richard, Abra, Kelela immediately spring to mind as her peers). The lopsided, one-wheel-falling-off wonk of “Ride of Your Life” gives way to “Party Favors,” an off-kilter banger that inflates and deflates, swelling with and hissing out helium. And really, considering the country is currently on Mr. Trump’s Wild Ride, shouldn’t the music crafted during it swerve left, taking bumpy, pitch-black back roads instead of paved, well-lit streets?  Generally, production here is drizzly and overcast, and work from newcomer Stephen Spencer (his glitchy-yet-sultry slow-burner “Spacetime” is just begging to soundtrack a futuristic sex scene) to vets like Metro Boomin, Boi-1da, and The-Dream (whose winking “Company” is the lone cloudless song on the project) is excellent and cohesive despite there being almost as many producers as there are songs. Obviously they were inspired by the theme—Tinashe has long preferred shadows and slinkiness to bright poppiness, and Nightride is strictly after-hours music. She even trades her standard breathiness for a richer tone to match the deep groove of “Sunburn.” The listener’s only decision is setting—dim club, deserted freeway, darkened bedroom. The music is infinitely interesting, possibly more so than the artist singing it. But then again, you shouldn’t count out anyone releasing an album like Nightride. As she whispers after “Sacrifices,” “I will not be ignored.” Nominally, The Microcosm is a European sequel to I Am the Center: Private Issue New Age Music in America, 1950-1990, a heavyweight compilation of American new age music curated by Douglas Mcgowan of the California-based Yoga Records and released on Light in the Attic in 2013. But it’s not quite that simple. In ’70s America, cassettes by artists like Steve Halpern and Iasos became surprise best sellers, and new age became an industry, with a mail order network, its own chart—even, from 1987 onward, its own Grammy Award. But while this sort of music—mellow, instrumental, technologically savvy and concerned with matters of the spirit—certainly existed in Europe, it defied such easy categorization. In The Microcosm’s liner notes, McGowan explains how more than one artist featured refused to be involved if the project carried the “new age” tag. Instead, the collection is subtitled Visionary Music Of Continental Europe, and if that sounds vague, McGowan has set himself the task to prove otherwise, drawing lines between disparate musicians who share a belief in something greater, but are resolutely off on their own trip.Whereas I Am the Center surveyed several generations, covering a 40-year window between 1950 and 1990, The Microcosm takes a tighter focus. The earliest of these 16 tracks dates from 1970—birth year of pioneering commercial synths like the ARP 2500 and Minimoog—and the latest from 1986, as analog instruments were being superseded by a new generation of digital music equipment. Some names here will be familiar to those even loosely acquainted with experimental European music of the period. The compilation begins with “Creation Du Monde,” a 1973 track by Vangelis, who would later find global fame scoring Blade Runner and Chariots of Fire, but is featured here having just left the Greek prog rock group Aphrodite’s Child to explore more ambient realms. A serene soundscape made from a Hammond organ treated with tape echo, it found its way to soundtrack Carl Sagan’s Cosmos, and thus to the ears of a generation of American youth open to enlightenment from above.Also present are a number of names typically associated with krautrock—itself a term contested by its creators, but that’s another story. Hans-Joachim Roedelius, formerly of Kluster and Harmonia, is represented by “Wenn Der Südwind Weht,” which sends a blissfully centered melody pirouetting slowly through a soft cumulonimbus of synths. “Brüder Des Schattens—Söhne des Lichts” captures Popol Vuh some years after founder Florian Fricke had abandoned synthesizers as a route to transcendence; instead we hear them crafting a medieval-tinged devotional music with sitar, piano and church choir. Manuel Göttsching’s Ash Ra Tempel were, early on, one of the more fiery and eruptive kraut groups, but “Le Sourire Volé” is in line with the looping experiments of Göttsching’s solo work, guitar and Farfisa organ cast out in shimmering waves. All great stuff, but even when pursuing spiritual ends, the krautrock groups veer towards studious art music, and the most intriguing material on The Microcosm comes from its more obscure, eccentric figures—a cast of mystics, shamans and oddballs who, in their friendly earnestness and paperback spirituality, feel somewhat closer to the American new age fraternity. Some, like Robert Julian Horky or Ariel Kalma, achieve rich soundscapes through homespun means: the former, a longhaired Austrian flautist, achieved his remarkable, pulsating “Dance for a Warrior” by running his instrument through an Eventide Harmonizer; the latter’s “Orguitar Soir” gently layers plucked guitar, droning Farfisa and the sound of birdsong captured in the Borneo rainforest. Others, like Ralph Lundsten or Gigi Masin, pare their music right back, leaving mere wisps of melody and warm tones that glow like embers.Mcgowan’s liner notes are an essential accompaniment to this often abstract music, supplying valuable biographical context. Bernard Xolotl, a French-born synesthete and student of sacred geometry, explains his deeply trippy “Cometary Wailing (Night Plateau)” was recorded during a week of “musical transcendence rites” powered by MDMA. Enno Velthuys, whose “Morning Glory” is one of the compilation’s gentle highlights, is described as a “Dutch Syd Barrett,” a ’60s burnout who whiled away his dotage lost in a private world of psychedelic synth exploration. And there is the German-born musician Georg Deuter, whose “Spirales” is plucked from one of his 60 albums of reiki sound healing, made while resident of Rajneeshpuram, a commune in eastern Oregon founded by the Indian guru Osho. (In a dark twist of a very new-age kind, Rajneeshpuram entered the history books when Osho’s followers contaminated salad bars across Oregon with salmonella, poisoning at least 700 people—the largest biological terrorism attack in US history).In short, good stories. But The Microcosm would stand up without them. New age might be a goldmine, but even a quick survey of the genre demonstrates you need to dig through plenty of fluff to find the good material, and it’s a testament to Mcgowan’s research that nothing here feels hokey or kitschy. If this feels like a slightly less coherent set than I Am the Center, blame the idea of visionary music itself, a category that—by its nature, perhaps—lacks clear boundaries. Still, none of that diminishes the power of the contents. As Robert Julian Horky puts it: “I do my work under any name or label. Time is a River, you know.”Pretty much every project David Pajo has participated in—the pioneering post-rock of Slint and Tortoise, his winding instrumentals and downbeat folk as Papa M and Pajo, the blunt heavy metal of Dead Child—has made a virtue of stylistic consistency. Once you’ve heard the few first notes of a Pajo album, you know what you’re in for, and that commitment to cohesion has always been a strength.All of which makes Highway Songs a risky record. For the first time, Pajo has relaxed his directorial control—“I just would let the songs go on tangents and run wherever they want,” he said recently—and mixed styles rather than picking one. He opens with a lumbering metal jam, switches to an Autechre-like electronic collage, then shifts to soundtrack-worthy guitar accompanied by a sharp drum-machine beat. The rest of the ride on Highway Songs is just as enjoyably bumpy, as contrasting styles continually butt up against each other with little in the way of smoothed-out segues.What makes it all work is Pajo’s patience in constructing a song. Everything here truly unfolds, gradually moving from an initial idea—a riff, a beat, a simple melody—into a multi-layered composition. You can almost hear him working through the tunes as he’s making them, which gives them an intimate feel. Lots of Pajo’s best music—particularly Papa M’s Whatever, Mortal, and his self-titled Pajo LP—bears this kind of private, homemade aura, enhanced by a voice that’s always on the verge of a whisper.In the case of Highway Songs, the music is literally homemade, recorded while Pajo was cooped up in his Los Angeles apartment recovering from a motorcycle accident that almost cost him a leg. It’s been a rough past few years for him: in early 2015 he attempted suicide, which he’s been forthcoming about since. You can hear some of that pain and struggle in Highway Songs—take the somber, cautious strains of the acoustic guitar essay “DLVD”—but it would be unfair to say this album is more emotional than any of his others. He’s always infused his music with a wistful, poignant tone, and he’s still great at that.Besides, Highway Songs ultimately feels hopeful rather than weary, upbeat rather than defeated. There’s optimism in the sunny strums of “Walking On Coronado,” the chugging riffs of “Green Holler,” and the nursery rhyme of closer “Little Girl,” the only song on which Pajo sings. The lyrics are taken from a songbook Pajo found, but they could’ve easily been custom-written for Highway Songs: “Little girl,  teach me to laugh again...to wonder why again.” At this point in his well-travelled career Pajo doesn’t need to learn anything new, but it’s great to hear that he still wants to anyway.Few genres ride the cutting edge as efficiently and boldly as grime. Much like hip-hop, grime’s startlingly adventurous productions have often predicted the shapes and sounds that will bubble up from the underground and into the pop sector. Recent innovations from the likes of Rabit, Logos, Murlo, and Visionist have stretched grime’s boundaries, nudging the genre into ever more surreal and unexpected directions. In 2014, Gobstopper label boss Mr. Mitch and London-based producer Yamaneko further solidified their places among this new wave, with the release of Parallel Memories and Pixel Wave Embrace, respectively. Parallel Memories contained gossamer textures and breathless tracts of negative space. Pixel Wave Embrace was animated by the idyllic moods and vivid colors of meditation tapes and video game soundtracks. Both pointed to a softer, slower, and sparser approach to a genre infamous for its whiplash juxtapositions and hardline tenacity.Over the last year, Mitch and Yamaneko have been working intermittently on a joint project, Yaroze Dream Suite, the results of which are collected in this four-track EP. “There’s a Venn diagram where Parallel Memories and Pixel Wave Embrace meet and a lot of this project came from there,” Yamaneko has said, and for the most part that sentiment holds true. Opener “Pixel Dreams” sets the tone for the EP’s woozy, climate-controlled atmosphere. Built around a strikingly simple melody and spacey, shivering synth tones, the track is the most successful marriage of the two producers’ styles: Mitch’s love for cool, weightless minimalism and Yamaneko’s new age-mining ambience. Plinking chirps, video game sound FX, and trap-like snaps lend the song additional heft, but the outcome remains keenly delicate, dulcet.Closer “Spirit Temple” is similarly jaunty—all skeletal beat programming and melodious synths. Like “Pixel Dreams,” it trades grime’s brute force for restraint, as its arrangements unspool slowly. This scenic take on grime allows the listener to zoom in on each component, drawing out subtle threads and small pockets of emotion that might have otherwise gone unnoticed. “In the Moonlight,” featuring guest vocalist Hannah Mack, flutters with ghostly sirens, prodding synths, and a plaintive sax line; when Mack invites us to “Free your mind/‘Cuz everything’s sublime,” it underscores the EP’s central theme. This is grime engineered to float, not punch.Despite the EP’s pillowy silhouettes and beguiling tempos—and several moments of outright bliss—Yaroze Dream Suite often falls prey to its own moderation. Where the duo’s solo releases come across meditative and understated, YDS occasionally scans as mild, and, at times, underdone. No where is this more apparent than on “Awakening,” a brooding cut chiseled from rumbling pads and disembodied vocals; it circles itself a half or so dozen times without going anywhere particularly surprising, or novel. The scope of the EP just feels smaller. Still, YDS remains fascinating throughout, and the question of how its ideas will shape the duo’s future output is enough to strike the interest of any grime diehard.An Odd Entrances arrived fast, even by Thee Oh Sees standards. The Bay Area-born psych band has always worked at a feverish clip—at least an album a year, in additions to shelves of singles, EPs, rarities and miscellany—but their 18th and latest studio full-length follows its predecessor A Weird Exits by a mere three months (for the truly impatient fan, they’d also released a live album just a month before that one). The band has reached the point where their prolificacy has become a kind of performance art, an experiment in how much worthwhile product one group can deliver without releasing an outright dud. Though it’s not a force of nature like the other LPs Thee Oh Sees have produced since returning from their farcically brief 2013 hiatus, Odd Entrances more than keeps their streak alive.  Making the most of the band’s new, double-drummer lineup, A Weird Exits was a concussive dropkick of a record, as focused and ruthlessly efficient as a wood chipper. It didn’t even pause for any of the woozy, psych-pop numbers that frontman John Dwyer usually smuggles onto each record, and now we know why: He was saving them for this one. Recorded during the same sessions, An Odd Entrances is a kinder, gentler companion to its shredding predecessor (“an appendix, if you will,” according to the liner notes), a clearinghouse for all the tangents and detours that would have dulled that record’s fierceness. It’s got riffs—opener “You Will Find It Here” is an absolute beast—but for the most part Entrances doesn’t try to melt your face. It just wants to hang out a bit, maybe split a joint and stare at the sky before calling it an early night.   Three of these six songs are leisurely instrumentals, one of them, “Jammed Exit,” a direct continuation of Exits’ trippiest number, “Jammed Entrance.” The tracks share the same Krautrock groove, except this time a wayward flute scribbles all over it. Like much of Entrances, it feels like a record collector’s in joke—a nod, perhaps, to the Blues Project’s Projections, or maybe some forgotten Nuggets-era deep cut. Other references are less obscure. “The Poem” is pure Magical Mystery Tour, right down its spacey prose and melted-taffy strings, while “At the End, on the Stairs” conjures a Donovan-esque blur of paisley and incense. Then “Nervous Tech (Nah John)” ends the record as it began, with another percolating jam that lets both of the drummers get some.  Much to the exasperation of newcomers looking for a consensus entry point into their endless discography, Thee Oh Sees have been so astonishingly consistent that few of their records tower far above (or for that matter fall far below) any other. An Odd Entrances is the rare effort from the band that clearly announces itself as a lesser work. Even at just half an hour long, it’s so disconnected that it feels more like an odds-and-ends collection than the group’s actual odds and ends compilations. Casual fans can take a guilt-free pass on this one, then, but as always, the group’s insatiable base won’t have any reason to regret placing their pre-orders. If A Weird Exits was Thee Oh Sees’ Thanksgiving feast, An Odd Entrances is Friday’s turkey and stuffing sandwich—hardly a destination meal, but plenty satisfying in its own way.For his first release on Warp, the Italian electronic producer Lorenzo Senni drew on impish visual artist Ed Atkins’ video piece “Ribbons.” If you haven’t had the fuddling pleasure of seeing Atkins’ videos in-person, they involve hyperreal digital animations—usually avatars of himself—as they stumble through video game-like realms, muttering pop songs in bedrooms, airports, pubs, clubs, and other surreal and mundane spaces. Atkins’ sodden protagonists may croon the likes of Elton John and Randy Newman, but his aesthetics match those of Senni. His tracks also revel and find depth in synthetic surfaces, make pop allusions, and simulate the maddening sensations that arise from the digital corporeality of our modern life.Senni finds all the thematic material he needs in one of electronic music’s most maligned genres: trance. His early albums were forays into glitch and ambient, but with trance, Senni sought the ecstatic in isolating that music’s builds and breakdowns. He excludes the elements where most listeners would find pleasure centers of such music, in its bass and drums. Like Heatsick with his Casio and Aphex Twin’s own rabbit hole plunge with the Cheetah MS800, Senni maniacally deploys but one keyboard for all of his sounds, the Roland JP8000. As he told Fact last year, “if I had to approach trance music, I had to have that synthesizer.” Persona is denser than Senni’s previous albums, as the JP8000 is now layered, each bit of space filled with more effects. The result is maximal. The delirious BPM and synth stabs that gush forth on “Win in the Flat World” are cheesy and over-caffeinated, initially bringing to mind the productions of Nozinja and even PC Music. But while the track keeps up its whiplash machinations, slowly little tears form in its synthetic fabric. A curlicue of electric sax appears, the dense chords dissolve, and a single key is left to fidget. “One Life, One Chance” is equally cartoonish, a festival’s-worth of fist-pumping anthems freeze-dried and then shoved into three-minute pop length. A smear of bright brass and color, EP standout “Rave Voyeur” is a dizzying carousel—which makes its fluttering breakdown and subsequent build-up, halfway through, all the more thrilling.Trance may be what Senni references explicitly, but it’s when he lightens his tracks by just a few clicks that the underlying intent and intensity of Persona get teased to the surface. On a less-manic number like “Angel,” Senni wrings a sense of contemplation out of the fast arpeggios. Closer “Forever True” seemingly settles on a breakneck speed, but Senni slams on the brakes and the track turns spare, slow, and hushed. A catchy, if halting, melody emerges, and one can almost imagine a synthesized Atkins avatar awkwardly lurching to it.All the world’s a stage to Elias Bender Rønnenfelt, Iceage frontman and Marching Church mastermind. The Dane was sporting a death mask when we first met him in the early ’10s—a grungy Hamlet, flailing and wailing beneath the house lights. Championed by Matador, his band ascended, and in time, those tragic poses became more polished, less garish—and on 2014’s ambitious Plowing Into the Field of Love, downright romantic. Rønnenfelt attempted to continue Iceage’s momentum after their last album, but his writing failed to open up a clear map for the band’s next steps. Naturally, the musician wrung out his brainstorms into the new Marching Church album instead. This time around, the project’s no longer a solo effort: Rønnenfelt’s formally incorporated his backing band from This World Is Not Enough–a formidable crew featuring members of Lower, Hand of Dust, and others—and his Iceage bandmate Johan S. Weith into the group writ large. Such moves beg the question of overarching intentions, of where Iceage ends and Marching Church begins; despite the confessional undertones of its title, Telling It Like It Is offers little in the way of demarcation–but boy, is there drama.Last year, the Dane visualized his Marching Church as one man’s luxuriant fantasy, plucked from the pages of Dorian Gray (“What I pictured was me in a comfortable armchair, adorned in a golden robe, leading a band while a girl kept pouring me champagne”). This decadence—manifested in moaned tantrums, eye-rolling Swans worship, and directionless, woe-is-me racket—torpedoed This World Is Not Enough, rendering it a slog. Thankfully, Marching Church’s sophomore effort scales back the melodrama and ramps up the discipline: Rønnenfelt and company are focused on verses and choruses and dynamics, rather than self-indulgent noodling—and in the case of this album, a little bit goes a long way. The delirious “Lion’s Den” opens with a far-off subterranean rumble—Kristian Emdal’s loping bass encircles a skittering piano line, while the forlorn melodica squeals–before a brittle, clanging backbeat surfaces, kicking off the hypnotic death march over which Rønnenfelt presides, eyes glinting, lips curled. After he’s lulled us into complacency with an otherworldly falsetto, the chorus hits, his voice deepens into his usual bloodthirsty moan, and dread sets in. “In the lion’s den,” he taunts, as if smelling our fear through the speakers, “They still bite after you/They still chase after you/Come on in.” Is Rønnenfelt offering an escape from the beasts’ assault, or is he just another big cat  in the big city, peering from behind his disguise? The beauty’s in the liminality: not just on “Lion’s Den,” but in the album’s broader creative approach, which, however formalistically grounded, seeks to blur the lines between human passion and studio precision through copious overdubbing. “We wanted it to sound like a studio and the instruments, as if the studio became a member of the band,” he told CLRVYNT, “We didn't want it to sound like a realistic live band playing.” Indeed, the album’s inherent connections with the uncanny valley, its inquiries into where the band ends and the cavernous surroundings begin, are more effective dramatic vessels than any of Rønnenfelt’s ham-fisted imagery. It’s hard not to stifle a chuckle at his operatic bellows regarding the act of being “fist-fucked by destiny,” or at the blistering chorus on “Heart of Life,” wherein the Dane offers a compelling impression of Nick Cave after a few too many cocktails—“At the heart of life, shoo-gahh!.” On the other hand, the record's overarching dynamics—the existential tug-of-war between the band’s hypnotic krautrock attack, Rønnenfelt’s vengeful yowls, and the studio’s limitless expanses on the glam-but-glum “2016” and the country-tinged “Calenture” (familiar and yet ever-so-off, like a trip to Westworld)–suggest that the musician’s at least partially aware of his own absurdity, and perhaps, that he’s learning how to weaponize it. Matthew McQueen’s Leaving Records is quickly becoming one of the most diverse labels going. His own music swings from hip-hop to ambient, and McQueen has found common ground between those dueling interests, releasing a stream of disparate records ranging from the new age of Laraaji, SunPath, and his own Matthewdavid moniker to unclassifiable records by Guy Blakeslee, Seiho, and Deantoni Parks and a steady stream of off-kilter hip-hop in the mode of Flying Lotus’ Brainfeeder imprint. Luz, from L.A. producer Devonwho, is the latest Leaving release to continue the trend, drawing on R&B, funk, and hip-hop.Devonwho (born Devon Fox) is part of the Klipmode collective that includes friends and Leaving labelmates Mndsgn, Knxwledge, and Suzi Analogue, and their vision for hip-hop shares both influences and an ideological point of view, celebrating the synth-driven nostalgia of the early ’80s. Luz is situated in a wobbly aesthetic of Zapp-style synths, with a blunted haze hanging on top of everything.At its best, Luz presents Devonwho as a fresh new voice, with a handful of standout tracks that argue that even today there’s still gold to be found in the g-funk swamps. The moody “Trueandyou” has a pulsing, emotive synth and a stuttering hi-hat beat, and “Andthentherewas” comes off like a lazy brother of “Still D.R.E.,” featuring a similarly plinky melody. Both tracks recognize the value of melody over squelch, and Devonwho drapes a lovely overlay of synths to complete the picture. “Alphaloop,” “Trio,” and “Anti-ragequit” mine a similar vein, with the latter sounding like it could have been the anthem to a different, more Dazed and Confused version of Stranger Things.On two of Luz’s weaker tracks, Devonwho brings in vocalists, perhaps as a way of advertising his production to beat-seeking rappers. As uninspiring as the vocal cuts are, they present a welcome change of pace on a record with a relatively limited palette and a handful of boring snoozes. At a relatively economical 39 minutes, and with 11 of its 13 tracks being instrumentals, Luz amply showcases Devonwho’s chops as a producer. But as a listening experience, it lags well behind this fall’s more consistent and inspired Body Wash from Klipmode compatriot Mndsgn.Since their 1990 debut, People’s Instinctive Travels and the Paths of Rhythm, A Tribe Called Quest have been forward-thinking, presenting their albums as full-length meditations on sound and society. They didn’t break new ground as much as they dug deeper into the lands beneath their feet, turning stones and cultivating fertile soil, unearthing the past and tending the roots, with album-length suites centered around loose conceits—the light diary of Instinctive Travels, the aural dive into drums, bass, and downbeats of 1991’s The Low End Theory, the pan-African flight of 1993’s Midnight Marauders, the dysfunction of hip-hop’s materialism on 1996’s Beats, Rhymes and Life, and the yearning sadness of 1998’s The Love Movement. The latter strived to serve as a healing elixir and balm for what was, up until recently, the swan song for one of the greatest acts that hip-hop has ever produced.Alluded to constantly via rumors and unfounded hopes, a forthcoming Tribe album seemed like wishful thinking for years. Despite the assurances of legendary music executives, fans could not be blamed for being cynical. The group had splintered fabulously, as documented in Michael Rapaport’s unflinching 2011 documentary Beats, Rhymes & Life: The Travels of a Tribe Called Quest. Moreover, the death of member Malik “Phife Dawg” Taylor earlier this year, seemed to ensure that any future efforts would be full of excavated throwaways and repurposed vocals from other projects made fresh via studio magic. Yet, We got it from Here exists, their sixth (and final) album, and it’s full of unblemished offerings that were recorded at Q-Tip’s home studio following their performance on Jimmy Fallon’s The Tonight Show one year ago. And, against many odds, it’s an album that reinvigorates the group’s enviable discography without resting on the nostalgia of past accomplishment.The album’s first number, “The Space Program,” is quintessential Tribe—it has that sooty bottom heavy warmness, the uncluttered arrangements and bright instrumentation, and it sounds like a piece of 2016 instead of a fragment of 1994. For the first time in their career, the entire group appears to be at their peak, exuding a well-earned effortlessness. Even if Ali Shaheed Muhammad is listed nowhere on the credits, the act’s three MC’s—the abstract Q-Tip, the ruffneck Phife, and the often M.I.A. Jarobi—are on point all the time, picking up each other's couplets and passing microphones like hot potatoes. On “The Space Program,” Jarobi rhymes “We takin’ off to Mars, got the space vessels overflowin’/What, you think they want us there? All us niggas not goin’,” before Q-Tip nimbly takes over with “Reputation ain’t glowin’, reparations ain’t flowin’/If you find yourself stuck in a creek, you better start rowin’.” The song plays with a sci-fi framing—“There ain't no space program for niggas/Yo, you stuck here, nigga”—yet it’s not about an imaginary future, but right now. “Imagine if this shit was really talkin’ about space, dude,” Q-Tip raps, unveiling the entire song as a metaphor for gentrification, perhaps even forecasting the showdown over the Dakota Access Pipeline at Standing Rock. And just that quickly, you realize that Tribe—poetical, allegorical, direct, and forever pushing forward from the present—are back as if they never left. The timeliness of this album can’t be understated, nor could it have been predicted. On “We the People…,” Q-Tip breaks out into a mini-song as hook: “All you Black folks, you must go/All you Mexicans, you must go/And all you poor folks, you must go/Muslims and gays, boy we hate your ways/So all you bad folk, you must go.” It follows in the pathways of Jamila Woods’ HEAVN and Solange Knowles’ A Seat at the Table as an album that expresses the deeply painful and deep-seated racist attitudes of current America without rancor. That the hook echoes President-elect Donald Trump’s most famous and reductionist campaign views works in ways that it would not had Hillary Clinton garnered enough electoral college votes to win the election. (For comparison, the video for Ty Dolla $ign and Future’s “Campaign,” released the day before the election, seemed to bank on a Clinton victory in its jubilation, but now feels tone deaf.) Ironically, Tribe may have also been seeing a Clinton victory; Q-Tip references a female president on “The Space Program.”A decade and a half ago, while working on his (erroneously shelved, then belatedly released) sophomore album Kamaal the Abstract, Q-Tip was asked about grown men making hip-hop music—he had, after all, just entered his thirties and was still playing at what is largely a young person’s game. He countered that hip-hop was not solely a youth genre; that the media and commercial forces had made it so; that the top MC of the moment—Jay Z—was in his thirties; that the best art comes not from the exuberance of youth, but the mastery of form. We got it from Here proves that he was right. Q-Tip has long been quietly regarded as one of hip-hop’s most thoughtful and inventive producers, and this album is full of accomplished flourishes. On the lascivious “Enough!!,” the vocals of Ms Jck (of undersung alt-R&B progenitors J*Davey) are treated like source material, woven into the musical bed. There are layered, echoing, melodic sonic manipulations and restrained uses of Jack White and Elton John on “Solid Wall of Sound.” On the introspective and confessional “Ego,” White (again) is used sparingly and smartly for subdued electric guitar touches. We got it from Here is not the music of a producer showing off, but of one knowing what to do and when to do it. There is a bevy of guests on this record, but they all serve the project like instruments that come in and out without attempting to take over with solo turns. When “Dis Generation” uses a sample of Musical Youth’s “Pass the Dutchie,” one can see a labyrinth of in-jokes and conceptual easter eggs that extends to the rhymes: Phife prefers cabs to Uber; Jarobi is wizened, smoking on “impeccable grass” and waiting for New York to approve medical marijuana; and Busta Rhymes—who appears multiple times and sounds more at home with his Native Tongues brethren than he ever has with the extended Cash Money bling set or even on his The Abstract and the Dragon mixtape with Q-Tip—is “Bruce Lee-in’ niggas while you niggas UFC.” For his part, Q-Tip shouts out Joey Bada$$, Earl Sweatshirt, Kendrick Lamar, and J. Cole as “gatekeepers of flow/They are extensions of instinctual soul.” It’s what ATCQ has always been—self-referential without being self-serving, part of the pack but moving at their own pace, and able to lightly and relatedly convey observations that would be heavy and pedantic from just about anyone else.It can’t be said enough how simply good this record sounds and feels. Everyone here shows themselves to be a better rapper than they have ever been before, but that still doesn’t capture the ease and exuberance of it all, how Q-Tip curls flows and words on “The Donald,” how Jarobi surprises with packed strings of rhyme at each turn, how Phife and Busta Rhymes dip effortlessly in and out of Caribbean patois and Black American slanguage. (And that’s not even taking into account Consequence’s inventive word marriages on “Mobius” and “Whateva Will Be,” Kendrick Lamar’s energetic angst on “Conrad Tokyo,” or André 3000’s and Tip’s playful tag team on “Kids…”) The music is decidedly analog, a refutation of polished sheen and maximal perfection; it’s an extension and culmination of ATCQ’s jazz-influenced low-end theory. But that doesn’t capture the bounces, grooves, sexual moans, random bleeps, stuttering drums that float throughout—like every classic Tribe album, it defies simple descriptions.Many of the songs here hearken back to off-kilter and underexposed gems of days past (see: Tribe’s “One Two Shit” with Busta Rhymes and De La Soul’s ATCQ-featuring “Sh.Fe. MC’s” from days past for musical antecedents) without feeling like retreads, the free-wheeling whimsy and experimentation of the past having been replaced a grounded irony and proficiency. So much has stayed the same and yet so much has changed.There’s no overriding story that easily presents itself—no vocal guide a la Midnight Marauders, no driving ethos served on platter like the Low End Theory; the title itself, which lends to an interpretation of this as a project of hubris demanding homage, is never explicitly explained. Even Phife’s death is given due reverence, but isn’t treated as a central theme. We got it from Here... Thank You 4 Your service is all just beats, rhymes, and life. Nothing about this feels like a legacy cash-in; it feels like a legit A Tribe Called Quest album. We should be the ones thanking them.While working on Speedy Ortiz’s last LP, 2015’s Foil Deer, Sadie Dupuis was emerging from an abusive relationship. But rather than reflecting on the experience, Foil Deer was a concrete decision to grow stronger. “I’m not going to write any songs about this person because they’re a piece of crap who doesn’t deserve my mental energy,” Dupuis told Pitchfork at the time. Slugger seems to be still processing past pain but it takes “Raising the Skate”’s “I’m not bossy, I’m the boss” mentality and multiplies it by 100: what results is a guide to loving oneself, surviving, and supporting others. This empowering attitude should not come as a surprise for any fans of Speedy Ortiz. While touring Foil Deer, the band started a “help hotline” to encourage safety and accountability at their concerts. That same year, they raised money for Girls Rock Camp Foundation through an all-ages tour. But sonically, Slugger is 180 degrees from the scuzzy guitars and tangled wordplay of Speedy; Foreboding simmering is replaced by sparkling keys, dissonance is made danceable, and maybe there’s a keytar in there, who knows. Dupuis wrote and recorded the songs that would form Slugger over a two week period while living in the Fishtown neighborhood of Philadelphia. Her original concept was to home-record each song before entering a studio and  allocating each song to a different producer. Luckily, Dupuis avoided what could have been a chaotic collage and decided to produce the album herself, adding an additional layer of autonomy to a record all about positivity, in all caps and probably punctuated with multiple exclamation points.In some ways, Slugger is more accessible than any Speedy release. “I wanted to make songs that were the opposite of ‘Genie in a Bottle’ or ‘The Boy Is Mine,’” Dupuis has said, and Slugger definitely succeeds in this mission. Its messages are loud and clear and little is left unexplained. The downside of this is that sometimes listening to Slugger can feel like being hit over the head. Considering that every two minutes an American is sexually assaulted, this explicitness is perhaps not a bad thing, but there’s a fine line between showing and telling, and Slugger does a lot of the latter. Take lead single “Get a Yes,” a giggling and shimmering number that spells consent out quite plainly: “I say yes if I want to/If you want to you’ve gotta get a yes.” This message perhaps seems obvious to anyone listening to Slugger; that doesn’t mean it’s not an important idea to express. “Just a Friend” works in a similar way. “Put to bed your old ideas about my friend Ben,” Dupuis chirps over a swirling sea of blips before demanding, “If you’ve got a girl who says she’s just got a friend, then you should just believe.” The song concludes with the tongue-in-cheek call to “objectify these boys,” an idea that is unfortunately left at the end. “Hype” is a protest regarding labeling and pitting women against each other. “‘Cause I just wanna hype my best friends, man. I just wanna hype my best girls.” Slugger’s transparency raises the question “just what is the album trying to accomplish?” Is it simply offering anthems to an audience who already believes and agrees with these politics? Is there anything wrong with that? The less instructive and more oblique songs on Slugger include “<2” and the infectious “The Sting,” the former of which sounds like it could be a Speedy song. “Krampus (In Love),” which was previously released as a demo, is a holiday jingle that feels applicable and listenable year-round with truly poignant lines and imagery like “If beauty is a terror, will the snow cover the evidence of love as something beautiful?” Closing track “Coming Into Powers” is perhaps the most interesting track, a literal “fuck you pay me” declaration of empowerment. Ithaca, NY rapper Sammus joins Dupuis at the tail-end of the track, offering a welcome change in tone.“Sure, there’s sexiness to mystique, but when it comes down to it, it’s a really dangerous way to interpret what someone wants,” Dupuis told DIY magazine. Seemingly in protest against this mode of thought, Dupuis has left little within Slugger for listeners to unpack. One of Speedy Ortiz’s strengths is that beneath all the instrumental layers, there’s a narrative puzzle to unpack. Sad13’s Slugger solves its puzzle for you, but in the hope that you will be able to go at it alone in the future.Jacques Gaspard Biberkopf makes music for turbulent times. A Lithuanian producer with roots in Berlin’s club underground, his music—a liquid, digital audio collage of distressed electronics and manipulated field recordings—suits a world buffeted by technological disruption and tidal waves of capital. It isn’t dance music, exactly—too abstract, too spacious. But Biberkopf works with the club in mind, such spaces being, as he told FACT, “a total, immersive environment, rather than a stage with a predefined fourth wall.” Like, say, Hyperdub boss Kode9 or the Turner Prize winner Mark Leckey, Biberkopf straddles the worlds of dance music, art practice and academic theory, in search of something profound or meaningful to say about the times in which we live.Ecologies II: Ecosystems of Excess is a sequel to his 2015 EP Ecologies, and continues with many of its themes. This is a sort of speculative fiction in sound, dealing with the dawning of the Anthropocene, defined by scholars as the epoch of humankind: one of mass extinction, climate change, deforestation, oceans choked with plastic. Biberkopf is into collapsing boundaries—between the real and the virtual, the organic and synthetic, the gallery and the club. At times, Ecosystems Of Excess gestures towards dance music: see the pulsating trance synths that cut through “Transfiguration I: Enlightenment”; or “New World Order,” with its thudding, pressurized beats and flicking halogen hats. Elsewhere, it feels like a 2016 update of music concrete, as pioneered by figures like Bernard Parmegiani or Pierre Schaeffer. Processed electronics intermingle with heavily treated field recordings, tracks stretch out into protracted drones or twitch with sudden jump-cuts, and everything collapses into texture.The influence of critical theory and contemporary art runs throughout the record. The titles here—“Technocracy”, “Wetware”, “Eruption Of The Amorphous”—gesture to sci-fi and cyberpunk, or resemble chapter headings plucked from an ambitious philosophy Ph.D dissertation. The LP, meanwhile comes packaged with an art book by the design studio Maximage, in which surreal landscapes are overlaid with an essay by the writer Deforrest Brown Jr. that blurs the edges between academic theory and avant-garde poetry.This aesthetic is echoed in the music, which appears to resist clear interpretation. On “Eruption of the Amorphous,” voice software recites hollow platitudes. In the depths of “From Infinity To Here,” you can discern snatches of narrative—the splash of water, the rattle of a subway car, distant sobbing—but try to piece it together and you end up lost. The best moments here are those that set out to fool the ear. “Preacher” samples an African-American minister and makes him sound like a vein-popping MC of the Def Jux school. “Realer Than Real,” meanwhile, employs that common trope of 21st Century club music: the crack of gunshots. In a moment of pleasing absurdity, though, it chooses to blend it with the sound of panicking geese and cocktail jazz piano.Like recent records by Rabit and the Haxan Cloak, Ecosystems of Excess feels very tactile: you feel it as much as hear it. But its tone of high academic seriousness is something of a stumbling block. An artist like Holly Herndon works with similar conceptual ideas, but makes them feel like a playground, not a lecture. Ecosystems of Excess can be formally daring and grimly thrilling in its bold, dystopian vision. But it can feel rather enervating, inducing a sense of paralysis and alienation. Right now, just a glimpse of the way forward would be very welcome.Ever since the cartoonish screaming face of In the Court of the Crimson King, progressive rock has often felt like a mirror to the mind at its most active and untamable, transmitting feelings of anxiety through complex, intricate compositions. The genre has also always been an outlet for some of rock’s most capable musicians to put their skills to good use, though sometimes (especially with the help of sterile modern-day studio production) to the point of impenetrability. After debuting in 2009 as the solo project of Nigerian-American eight-string guitar wizard Tosin Abasi, Animals As Leaders have walked the tightrope between sheer technical virtuosity and actual emotional resonance, occasionally with thrilling results. Each of their previous three records has presented a tighter and more focussed band, as Abasi’s introduced a wide range of styles, from jazz to djent, into his band’s arsenal. The resulting music—a dense and triumphant brand of instrumental metal, with Abasi’s arpeggiated soloing always at the center—rewards close listening. It can be dazzling or exhausting, depending on your mood.Drummer Matt Garstka has called the band’s latest album, The Madness of Many, “the most natural-sounding Animals As Leaders album yet,” which seems like a bit like a paradox. There are a few moments on the record when you can see what he might have meant, like the intimate guitar solos that close out “Inner Assassins” or the (relatively) straightforward jazz fusion of “Private Visions of the World.” But, as always, the primary appeal of Animals As Leaders is just how unnatural they sound. Like any of their previous albums, Madness of Many includes no chaotic feedback squeals, no casual studio banter, no shouted count-offs to four (or to sixteen-and-three-eights, or what-have-you). The production is as clean and glossy as ever, and the band’s M.O. remains scoring dystopian cyborg fights on a burning planet as shooting stars explode in the background. Of course, they sound great doing it. More than any Animals As Leaders record yet, this one feels like the band settling into their skills, simply playing off each other as opposed to pushing themselves to new heights.Rather than “natural,” a more apt descriptor for Madness of Many might be Animals as Leaders’ most comfortable sounding album yet. Madness is a spacious and satisfying record: what it lacks in standout moments, it makes up for in coherence. Its ten tracks, all hovering around the five-minute mark, mostly steer clear of the band’s patented everything-at-once assault, favoring a slower burn. Few of these tracks feel like entirely new territory for the band, with Abasi returning to familiar tones and patterns and each song skittering around similar tempos. The moments that do feel new, like the lurching electronic raga of album opener “Arithmophobia,” are a welcome introduction of new texture into the occasionally monotonous mix of guttural guitars and synth.The album’s most daring section is its finale– the meditative sprawl of “The Brain Dance” and “Apeirophobia.” It’s not surprising to hear that Abasi is as inventive with acoustic guitar tones as he is with electric, but it’s a relief to hear him switch it up by the album’s end. “The Brain Dance” takes influence from both Latin guitar and Appalachian folk, with an ominous backdrop of reverb, while “Apeirophobia” is the album’s sparsest piece, layering guitars into a tranquil choir of strings. Both songs find Abasi stepping back from his frantic pace to take a breath, to maybe even enjoy himself. The title of Animals As Leaders’ previous album, The Joy of Motion, referred to Abasi, a practitioner of Transcendental Meditation, noticing how quickly his hands moved as he played guitar. On these two songs, he seems more content to let us bask in the joy of taking a break from all the noise.For a long time, the only thing there was to know about the gospel singer Washington Phillips is that there wasn’t much to know. Born in Texas in 1880, Phillips recorded a total of 18 songs between 1927 and 1929. Two of these songs were lost. The remaining 16—light, dreamy, paranormally gorgeous—were issued two at a time on 78-r.p.m. records, the precursor to the modern LP, then trickled out on vaguely anthropological collections like Negro Religious Music Vol. 2 or Screening the Blues. It wasn’t until 1980 that Phillips’ was given his own dedicated release, and then on a small label run by a high school English teacher in the Netherlands.Until now—and this is invariably the heart of Phillips’ story, at least as it’s usually told—people couldn’t even agree on what instrument Phillips used to accompany himself. Some said it was a zither, a narrow stringed box about the size of a laptop. Others said it was an obscure keyboard called a dolceola, in part on account of the Columbia Records’ scout (and Phillips’ producer) Frank B. Walker, who referred to it as a “dulceola.” In the early 1980s, a researcher at Tulane University named Lynn Abbott found a picture of Phillips in the Louisiana Weekly holding what looked like two zithers Frankensteined together, confirming only that whatever it was Phillips played, nobody had seen it before or since. In any case, this is what it sounds like: a small music box playing in a large, resonant cave, playful but indistinct, like dandelion fuzz loosed on a spring breeze.Recent research by the tireless Phillips chronicler Michael Corcoran reveals that Phillips called his instrument the Manzarene, giving rise to the title of a new digitally released collection from the Georgia label Dust-to-Digital called Washington Phillips and His Manzarene Dreams. As mentioned, there are only 16 known Phillips recordings in existence. Though remastered here, they have been released a few times before, including on a still-available Yazoo Records compilation called The Key to the Kingdom. (One version of Phillips’ songs, an LP by the Oregon label Mississippi Records, has a cover obstinately depicting Phillips sitting at a dolceola. Some myths are too beautiful to let go.)What I personally find remarkable about Phillips’ music is how gentle it is. Here is the American servant of a Christian God who never shouts, never growls, never beats his breast or stomps his feet to prove just how strong the spirit is within him. If early rock-and-roll borrowed the hysterics of gospel and turned them into an expression of sex, Phillips’ delivery—measured, conversational, disinterested in the Buddhist sense—is something I hear in ambient and new age music, or in the transcendent reticence of a songwriter like Bill Callahan, who appears to touch God not by reaching out but leaning back. My favorite song here is “What Are They Doing in Heaven Today” because it sounds like he really doesn’t know. My second-favorite is “Take Your Burden to the Lord and Leave It There” because it sounds like he has. No other gospel musician has come as close to convincing me that Jesus’ love might not stress me out.Ninety years on, with decades of exhumations of gospel and blues behind us, Phillips is still an anomaly. The same 1927 trip during which Frank B. Walker first recorded Phillips, he also recorded Blind Willie Johnson, the Dallas String Band, Lillian Glinn and a handful of other artists who sound more or less like musicians playing music in the 1920s. Even Johnson’s “Dark Was the Night (Cold Was the Ground),” an unprecedented recording that appears to capture a ghost crying inside a milk bottle, sounds like the Platonic ideal of a style that has become familiar. Phillips’ music remains weirdly without lineage or context, a sound unto itself.The blues is built on apocrypha and myth. It cannot be conveniently subjected to the demystifying rigor modern standards demand without being somehow denuded. You cannot – and maybe, to some extent, should not – fact-check the blues. And yet being black music made during the era of American slavery, institutional and beyond, it seems right as a matter of moral, even reparational course to read the stories of people like Phillips—a free black man who lived on acreage his father, uncles and grandfather bought after emancipation, and spent his Juneteenths slow-cooking a hog on the nearby church picnic green—as fully and precisely as possible.Phillips did not, as it had often been reported, die in an insane asylum, but after falling down a flight of stairs in a government building in Teague, Texas. You can see a picture of this staircase in the liner notes for Washington Phillips and His Manzarene Dreams. It is narrow and wooden and takes a sharp bend to the left about ten steps down. As ambivalent as I am about the mystery of his instrument being “solved” – and as insistently as I feel that explaining what he made his music with will never bring us any closer to the wonder of how – I am startled by the sight of these stairs: So tactile, so ordinary. The greatest mystery (of course) is that Phillips made this all on Earth.This summer, Dedekind Cut—the artist born Fred Warmsley, formerly known as Lee Bannon—began aggregating songs in a Spotify playlist titled “Ambient Essentials.” It’s an eclectic and personal collection of favorites within that wide-ranging umbrella: Julianna Barwick’s calm vocal loops, metallic harmonies by Autechre and Oneohtrix Point Never, Laraaji’s glimmering New Age. Warmsley gives the impression of a dedicated listener; this mix felt less like a toolbox than a window into some music he’s used to make sense of the world.As the prolific Warmsley has accumulated releases under his various monikers, his relationship with genre has shifted. He got his start producing instrumentals for Joey Bada$$ and the Pro Era crew, serving as their touring DJ in 2012. His output has since progressed from industrial beat-driven instrumentals to blistering jungle and techno, most recently landing in an eerie, arrhythmic place. Since adopting the moniker Dedekind Cut last year, Warmsley has put out three EPs, most recently the cassette American Zen, which comprised four tracks’ worth of even-keeled, dread-tinged drone. On $uccessor, his first Dedekind full-length, this sound emerges notably more grandiose, and more sinister. Leading up to the album’s release, Warmsley tweeted: “The parts you find ugly, uncomfortable, and nasty about [my] work as the Dedekind Cut will surely become its signature.”Though “ugly” may be an overstatement, $uccessor is marked by the productive discomfort that accompanies such unabashed intensity. Whereas American Zen maintained a temperate pace, $uccessor isn’t afraid to crescendo or screech to a halt. This isn’t background music; it’s cinematic, full of movement. Most of all, it’s cavernous. The gently lapping, William Basinski-esque tones of opener “Descend from now” are swallowed 90 seconds in by strings and oceanic tape hiss. This gives way to “Instinct,” in which a fuzzy rhythm, layered beneath a pretty synth melody, builds to an urgent gallop. As Warmsley blends flat, chilly digital tones and analogue elements (including a field recording of birdsong), the disjuncture further pries open this sometimes uncomfortably vast sonic landscape. Warmsley deftly bridges his influences, braiding liquid futurism into the textural warmth of disintegrating tape loops.There are moments when Warmsley loosens his compositional grip; tracks like “Fear in reverse” and “5ucc3550r” meander a bit, crackling and heaving without the insistence that characterizes much the rest of this release. But these slips into plotless quiet are among $uccessor’s most unsettling and purposeful moments. One review of March’s American Zen lamented that listeners “never find out what it’s trying to tell us”; asking Dedekind Cut to explain, however, seems a fundamental misunderstanding of the project’s vocabulary. A record can, of course, have a worldview without providing talking points. $uccessor is undergirded by blackness: it was co-released by NON, the Chino Amobi-helmed collective of artists from Africa and its diaspora; its cover is Deana Lawson’s striking 2014 photograph Cowboys, of two young black men in jeans and chaps atop horses startled by the camera’s flash. As Dedekind Cut, Warmsley makes use of ambient tropes, but this album’s stakes are set far outside the boundaries of that genre. (In spirit and in sound, he’s perhaps better matched alongside his collaborators here, which include the protean likes of Amobi, Angel-Ho, and serpentwithfeet.) If ambient music—so often treated as a somehow ideologically neutral form, its canon overwhelmingly white, Western, and male—can be described as an atmospheric entity, it’s then deployed here to new, ambitious ends. Warmsley’s work is shot through with the violence, anxiety, and fracture that pervade our atmosphere today. But on tracks like the stunning “46:50,” which features muffled vocals from Active Child, an elegiac softness also reaches out to the listener, offering solace. Warmsley has offered a remarkably expansive example of what these pliable forms can do. He seems winkingly aware, also, of the loaded nature of invoking a vast frontier. At a performance of $uccessor at New York’s Issue Project Room in October, old-school country music blasted as Warmsley walked onto the fog-filled stage, a curious counterpoint to the textural drone that followed. This, alongside Lawson’s Cowboys, points to a canny appropriation of the frontier narratives that have, I’d posit, quietly served as scaffolding for much of the Western experimental music canon. $uccessor marks a taking of the reins, so to speak, a direction that will hopefully continue to propel Dedekind Cut.The founders of Cologne’s Kompakt label have grown into their established characters: The silver-haired co-founder Wolfgang Voigt is the stern but affectionate paterfamilias. Reinhard Voigt, his younger brother, will forever be the excitable teen. Superpitcher, with his scarves and propensity for torch songs, is the dandy with Romantic leanings, prone to locking himself in his room with a copy of Baudelaire. Michael Mayer, on the other hand, has always seemed like the sociable, comparatively well-adjusted one—outgoing, generous (he specializes in marathon sets of eight hours or more), sensitive, fundamentally upbeat, plays well with others. The good son, in other words, the golden boy. He has never been the most prolific artist—&, released on the long-running electronic clearing-house !K7, is only his third solo album in 13 years—but his easy charm offers a crucial counterbalance to the more difficult tendencies of Kompakt, the label he co-founded. While Wolfgang Voigt has sampled Kafka audiobooks and foraged glumly through the German Wald, Mayer specializes in self-evident anthems like “Good Times” and the no-frills “Speaker” (with its so-brainless-it’s-brilliant refrain, “I am your speaker/Speaker, speaking to you/I am not talking/I’m speaking, speaking to you”). Above all, he has endeavored to remind techno fans of the centrality of pop and disco, even at the humorless height of the minimal techno craze.I don’t think it’s any coincidence that while many producers thrive on solitude, Mayer tends to draw his energy from other people. It’s part of what makes him such a sharp DJ and such a talented producer of euphoric, good-natured fare. Much of his earliest work was collaborative. He, Reinhard Voigt, and Tobias Thomas used to record as Forever Sweet, while he and Thomas comprised the short-lived Friends Experiment. In 2007, after a considerable spell in which it seemed he’d never get around to following up his debut LP, Touch, he and Superpitcher teamed up for the gonzo, not entirely satisfying SuperMayer project. His new album translates that round-robin approach to the studio, as Mayer teams up with a different artist on every song.The album plays to his strengths. It is more playful than his last LP, and also more finessed. The opening “We Like to Party,” a collaboration with Roman Flügel, is among the best things he’s  produced. Goofy name notwithstanding, the track offers the perfect blend of over-the-top thrills and subtle details. This is the kind of craftsmanship that doesn’t show its hand: A funny little ersatz sax riff goes sailing over artfully layered percussion that fills up every available space without ever feeling cluttered. There are snippets of vinyl scratching and crowd-stoking shouts reminiscent of hip-house’s heyday. It is joyous, faintly ridiculous, and versatile: It would work wonders on a festival stage, but it’s clearly made with 200-capacity rooms in mind, for parties where everyone knows everyone else and the floor is sticky with prosecco.The rest of the album follows in similar fashion. “Disco Dancers,” a reunion with core labelmates Jörg Burger and Wolfgang and Reinhard Voigt, balances loose-limbed, good-times disco with a gently unhinged clarinet solo in the psychedelic breakdown. “State of the Nation,” with the trance-leaning Brazilian producer Gui Boratto, tips into the latter musician’s rich, creamy chord progressions with a delirious grin; if you could bronze a sunset, it’d appear something like this. “Gemination,” with Kompakt labelmate Kölsch, does an admirable job of translating Depeche Mode’s sweeping dramatic gestures via punchy, precision-engineered techno. (If “We Like to Party” is aimed at small rooms, this one’s meant to be supersized.) And the Agoria collaboration “Blackbird Has Spoken” might top them all. The chord progression feels simple at first—just sumptuous strings, slathered on liberally. But the longer you listen, the more it feels like a riddle, in which ascending and descending voices leave you twisting in midair. It’s ecstatic and not a little dizzying, like the feeling of coming up on a drug, but it’s also comforting. You want to stay inside it and linger. As new harmonies keep piling up, the sense of physicality intensifies, like a dream of running underwater.Sometimes the craftsmanship outstrips the expression. “Voyage Interieur,” a throwback electro jam featuring Miss Kittin, is a note-perfect period piece, but its cool is so studied you find yourself checking for a pulse. At the same time, even though Joe Goddard’s voice is full of quirk and character, it isn’t quite enough to make his song interesting. “Comfort Me,” a Prins Thomas co-production featuring husky vocals from Irene Kalisvaart, aims for Fleetwood Mac, but from the Spanish guitar to the vocal harmonies, it’s an uphill slog. And while the Hauschka collaboration, a freestyle/chamber-music fusion, is clever enough—Fairlight orchestra hits meet actual orchestra—it doesn’t feel as necessary as the album’s best material.Mayer is far better working alongside Barnt on “Und Da Stehen Fremde Menschen” (“And There Stand Strangers”), which folds a folky sample of what sounds like a German Nick Drake into a tough, moody swirl. Dissonant organs mash and hits of helium tilt toward the stratosphere, but the crisp beat never falters and the doleful vocals keep us grounded. It goes to the crux of what Mayer does best, balancing a strict, buttoned-up groove with the faintest hint of mischief.Contemporary classical music and remix culture have not always been natural partners. Remix albums dedicated to pieces by Steve Reich or Philip Glass often sound more dutiful than imaginative—despite the fact that the minimalist school of composition has inspired countless approaches to electronic music. It's proved a tough problem to solve, yet the attractive idea of placing beat-oriented classical works in the hands of cutting-edge producers generally ensures that new proposals will be forthcoming.  Timber Remixed is the latest entrant in this field. It carries some familiar drawbacks, but also some ingenious stretches. On this double-album set, the work under electronic re-consideration is a percussion piece by veteran composer Michael Gordon. A co-founder of the influential Bang On A Can collective, Gordon’s approach to polyrhythmic complexity led the minimalist movement into some new territory, starting in the 1980s. His 2009 work Timber requires six percussionists to navigate a wide array of patterns, while each playing only a single simantra—otherwise known as a 2x4. (Their varied lengths can produce different pitches and overtones, a possibility first exploited by composer Iannis Xenakis.)Still, boards are boards. And the limited instrumental range of a “wood plank ensemble” might suggest a static experience. Unless the composition itself is really something. The consistent feel of discovery that is evident on the 2011 premiere recording of Timber is due to Gordon’s talent for upending expectations. Rich and bizarre tapestries spring up all over the nearly hour-long piece. Pointedly, Gordon’s beat layers don’t build up in a process-oriented way that might help you anticipate what’s coming next. Rhythmically, Timber is a work of jagged surprise—even when this quality is masked by the surface simplicity of the wood-struck tones.The original release of Timber was performed by the Dutch group Slagwerk Den Haag. Timber Remixed offers two different recordings by the American group Mantra Percussion. On the first disc, a studio recording by Mantra is remixed by twelve different electronic artists. This coterie includes names that are well-known outside the field of new-classical—like Fennesz and Oneohtrix Point Never—as well as underground luminaries like Ikue Mori. The second disc of Timber Remixed presents a complete, live performance of the original piece.It’s a smart move to append a full performance of Timber to the remixes. In this way, the relative star power of Tim Hecker will guarantee that people actually check out Gordon’s music. Though while it is ably played, the live version here isn’t quite on the level of the first release—which to my ears still sounds like the the best vehicle for the composer’s designs. The live take on Timber Remixed features more sustain, and more bass-heavy pulsation. These qualities serve the composition’s most propulsive passages well. But they also rob Timber of some textural variance. (The original take by Slagwerk Den Haag has a drier sound that makes the piece’s eccentricities stand out better.) As a result, Timber Remixed is defined more clearly by its remixes. Tim Hecker’s rethink has been billed as a reference to Steve Reich’s “phasing” compositions. And his piece does sound like Gordon as imagined by Reich, circa 1967. But by reaching back to a period of minimalism before Gordon’s ascent, this remix ignores some of what makes the composer’s music distinct. Jóhann Jóhannsson’s leadoff track has a light-touch approach that involves stretching a few drones atop Mantra’s studio playing. It’s an attractive sound, but you’d be just as well served to listen to Gordon’s music straight up.Composer Sam Pluta’s take, which follows next, shows how much can be gained by discarding the central, wood-tone nature of Timber. After starting out with the collective sound of the simantras, Pluta transmutes and twists the percussion notes into purely electronic washes of sound that still retain Gordon’s melodic patterns. After this feat of filtering out the percussion from a percussion piece and keeping it recognizable, Pluta adds crackling beats back to the mix, for a bit, before closing with harmonics that hit like amplifier feedback.Other acts with audacious approaches to this assignment include Oneohtrix Point Never and Deerhoof’s Greg Saunier. The former blends in synthesized choral accompaniment; the latter fosters a madcap flow by isolating samples and pushing them to extremes of timbre and tempo. HPrizm’s remix uses quick dynamic shifts to create an unstable, foreboding environment.Some of the final entries move so far away from the source material that you’d be hard pressed to identify them as Gordon remixes in a sonic lineup. (That’s the case with Hauschka’s entry, which goes heavy on the prepared-piano.) Driving too far afield from all the elements of Timber can seem as unrewarding a choice as expressing undue fidelity to the piece. Though thanks to the most creative works on the first disc, this crossover project still shows that it's able to do justice to Gordon’s work, while also suggesting some promising avenues for future, cross-genre collaboration.Exactly halfway through MC4, “Lockjaw” hits, and you start to think of French Montana as a rap star. Kodak Black, the preternaturally talented teenager from South Florida, does lots of the heavy lifting, but the song is too potent to simply be the product of good A&R work, or lucky proximity. In just over a decade of work, French has gone from hanger-on to something more vital and far more interesting; on this February’s superb Wave Gods, he reimagined the world at large as an extension of his knottiest late-‘00s mixtapes. It had all the stunt casting you’d expect from a rapper of French’s social stature, but it was a genre experiment. MC4 was supposed to be the capital-A album to solidify him as a mainstream force.Instead, an August release date came and went, the record pushed back for “sample clearance issues” that were later unmasked as low pre-order numbers. All this despite a Drake-assisted single (“No Shopping”), a cameo on Fat Joe and Remy Ma’s colossal “All the Way Up,” and despite “Lockjaw” entering the stratosphere. Three months later, it surfaced on the internet with little ceremony and even less promotion.Where are all the French Montana fans? There’s a chance that the anemic promo run kept MC4 from cutting through the election-year din, that French Montana album cuts never make it to the right years. But his debut album, 2013’s Excuse My French, flopped painfully despite an eye-popping guest lineup and a genuine hit. It also wasn’t his best showing: it had little of the woozy imagination he’d shown in the half-decade prior, and he hadn’t yet learned how to translate those interesting threads to a bigger stage.MC4 falls short of Wave Gods, but is a leaps-and-bounds improvement over Excuse My French. That it doesn’t appear to be the commercial breakthrough he needs is not the problem, per se—the thing that hampers the record at points is the impulse to shoot for a middle and shore up the base. The Miguel-assisted “Xplicit” crosses itself up from the jump, trying to marry a sleepy sex jam to something more Gothic and getting lost on the way. “Play Yaself” is closer to French’s wheelhouse, but the vocals and his writing are more or less anonymous. And even with best intentions, “Check Come” ends up less experimental than it is malformed.But the highs are a joy. “Brick Road” catches French in not one, but two of his best roles: somber-but-still-witty formalist on the front half, Autotune-guzzling serpent on the hook and on the back end. “2 Times” is an update on the Coke Wave DNA; “I’m Heated” is a bizarre and nearly-brilliant blend of Gotham rap styles from the Giuliani and Dinkins eras. “No Shopping” is an obvious hit that holds onto a bit of menace. “Have Mercy” enlists Jadakiss, Styles P, and Beanie Sigel for a preposterously fun posse cut that—thankfully—sounds distinctly like a French song. When MC4 succeeds, it does so like a bulk of his best work: with minor keys and big beats that let some air seep into the crevices.MC4 does struggle to develop an atmosphere of its own; “Lockjaw” and the Kanye- and Nas-featuring “Figure It Out,” both holdovers from Wave Gods, are two of the three strongest songs. So maybe the (mostly arbitrary) “mixtape” distinction will serve the record well, allowing it to live as a loose collection of component parts. It’s not going to build the sort of fervent fan bases that his collaborators enjoy, but it should remind his core audience of why he’s been able to survive a couple of sea changes in rap.And then there’s “Max & Chinx / Paid For.” The first half of the nine-minute, two-part closer is interspersed by phone calls from Max B and by a prayer that French shares with Max’s mother. French raps about Max’s son, about praying for mercy from God and from circuit court judges, about the 75-year-sentence that hung over Max’s head for years of incarceration. Max’s verse on the second half, “Paid For,” was one of the last he recorded before reporting to serve his sentence; Max’s engineer played it for French for the first time just last year. It’s followed by a turn from Chinx, who was murdered in 2015. French invokes Stack Bundles’s name—another fallen friend. He raps about depression, about bouts of insomnia and impromptu mosque visits. If the sorrow is tempered by anything, it’s Max’s voice:“You're blessed, you know I'm saying? And all you gotta do when you feel like that: Look at my situation. You know I'm saying? Think of my situation, n*gga.”  For those who think of Grateful Dead guitarist Jerry Garcia and lyricist Robert Hunter as major figures in American music, the Hart Valley Drifters’ Folk Time is a monumental discovery. Recorded in 1962, Folk Time is Garcia’s only known surviving studio recording from his banjo days before attaining electricity a few years later. The future Dead guitarist is clearly the quintet’s leader, or at least most charismatic, and the primary singing voice through most of the 17-song session, with the group’s vocal trio also including Robert Hunter on upright bass and future New Riders of the Purple Sage founder David Nelson on guitar. Folk Time captures three lifelong collaborators during their invaluable time exploring the roots of American music before making their own. Though the front cover portrait of Garcia as an itinerant young Mumford with suspenders and bed-roll might read as a little doofy at first, it’s also accurate. Garcia and his friends took up bluegrass and old-time music in the early ’60s with the same bright-eyed bushy-tailed enthusiasm that young folkies have displayed in every decade since. The difference is what the soon ex-Drifters did with it. Garcia fed folk traditions into the Dead’s psychedelic maw and eventually became an influential figure in bluegrass in his own right, inspiring longhairs to take to the banjo after his participation in 1975’s best-selling Old & in the Way. Though Deadheads have traded hissy audience recordings of Garcia’s early projects for decades, the KZSU tape never even existed as a rumor. It was found by filmmaker (and liner note writer) Brian Miksis in 2008 and never circulated. Taped in mono around a single microphone in the last months of 1962 at Stanford University’s KZSU, the Hart Valley Drifters were decidedly non-Stanford students and the opposite of radicals. The quintet hew strictly to the bounds of bluegrass and old-time music, even making sure to distinguish between the two styles during their band introductions, with Garcia playing guitar on the former, banjo on the latter. And it’s not that they’re especially breathtaking or groundbreaking traditionalists, either. They pick well together and know how to sing as a group. Even some notes don’t arrive in perfect harmony, the gospel back-and-forth of “Standing in the Need of Prayer” and dynamics of traditional foot-stompers like “Pig in a Pen” come off with jubilance, offering a hint of the charm that would (for some) carry the Dead through their most ragged moments. The Drifters probably wouldn’t be of much interest if not for their personnel. Comparing the one track Folk Time shares with Garcia’s later bluegrass combo Old & In the Way, “Pig in a Pen,” reveals everything the Hart Valley Drifters lacked, but could taste. But, like Bob Dylan hoboing around Greenwich Village covering Woody Guthrie and Leadbelly songs, Folk Time is the sound of Jerry Garcia and Robert Hunter absorbing their own set of influences, building their repertoires, and finding their voices.Containing the only extant recordings of Garcia singing Dock Boggs’s “Sugar Baby” (likely learned from Harry Smith’s fabled Anthology of American Folk Music) and winking, 19th-century sexual-political ballads like “Billy Grimes, the Rover,” Folk Time will be a delight for acoustic-minded Dead freaks. Eventually becoming one of rock’s most distinct vocalists, often getting by on charisma and expressiveness more than note-for-note accuracy, Garcia’s singing on Folk Time is far more developed than other circulating audience-made folk era tapes (and the earliest Grateful Dead recordings) would suggest. The 20-year-old Garcia fakes the slightest Southern twang on the opening “Roving Gambler” and elsewhere, perhaps involuntarily, but mostly his affable California reediness is in place. Unquestionably the best performance on the disc is the closer, a blues arrangement of “Sitting on the Top of the World” featuring only Ken Frankel’s guitar and Garcia’s voice, and a sure stunner for Deadheads. There’s a touch more of the affected twang, but the performance and recording transcend Garcia’s age and experience, drawing from a quiet power and providing the only real glimpse of the singer he would become in the Dead. Perhaps even using the single microphone as an instrument, Garcia’s voice brushes down to a whisper. Moving with a lazy gait, Garcia catches the song’s carelessness with all the conviction of a California native. Though Garcia’s singing had a long way to go, it’s especially evident how the conversational instrumental details of the Hart Valley Drifters could turn into the improvisational pockets of the Dead, the traded lines of “Nine Pound Hammer” only a few volts away from the twining guitars of “China Cat Sunflower.” Picking up the banjo after being discharged from the Army in 1960, Garcia immersed himself in folk music for a half-decade, practicing obsessively, working as a music teacher, and playing in a series of bands around the Palo Alto area, including the Thunder Mountain Tub Thumpers, the Black Mountain Boys, and others. Like many other central ’60s musicians who would eventually plug in and freak out, Garcia came of musical age during the great folk scare, finding post-War solace in ancient (and ancient-seeming) songs. Only a few years from dashing headlong into the neon-pulsing present tense of LSD, Garcia and others first dove deep into a mythic past that seemed to come alive in the grooves of old records and zoetrope-like flicker between banjo rolls.But they don’t always sound as if they believe it themselves. The album’s most unconvincing performance isn’t one of the mountain songs or labor tunes, but the traditional “All the Good Times Have Past and Gone.” Nelson was 19, Garcia was 20, and Hunter was 21 and who even could take that sentiment seriously coming from them? It’s perhaps the same reason why Garcia seems to occupy “Sitting on Top of the World” so effortlessly, a song he would sing as an ebullient bounce on the Dead’s 1967 studio debut and keep in his songbook until just before his 30th birthday in 1972. But with the Hart Valley Drifters in the early ’60s, the good times were only just showing the first signs of starting.For the better part of the 2010s, the role of British misery troubadour has been occupied by two people named Adele: Adele Laurie Blue Adkins—the Adele-Adele—and Adele Emily Sandé. Industry-wise, they occupy much the same niche: colossal-voiced balladeers of inoffensive angst and outlier sales. But the two artists are subtly different. The mononymic Adele’s music is rooted in Northern soul and not much else; when she brought popmaker Max Martin in for 25 it was both surprising and, for Max, restrained. Sandé follows more trends; her solo debut “Heaven” was hitched to the UK’s breakbeat revival, and subsequent singles have brought in grime and David Guetta’s brand of EDM. Adele’s music was adopted quickly by the X Factor-industrial complex; Sandé, who began her career as a Syco songwriter, was part of it from the start.Perhaps as a result, Adele’s music, with the notable exception of “Rolling in the Deep,” is human-sized—her songs are written to slot into the mundane heartbreaks and little resignations of everyday life. Sandé writes songs that start at cinematic and scale upward. (She must have been peeved she didn’t get to do the theme to Skyfall.) Her natural home is the place many Britons first met her (if not Americans): the 2012 London Olympics, where she performed in the opening and closing ceremonies.This is all well and good if you’re cheering on thousands of athletes, or soundtracking a trailer. It’s somewhat less so if you’re recording an album. Several tracks on Long Live the Angels, Sandé’s second, long-gestating LP, were co-produced by English DJ Naughty Boy, best known for crossover hit and Sam Smith showcase “La La La.” But instead of doing what he did there—curating bubbling-up dance trends like the ones on Sandé’s best hits—Naughty Boy indulges his, and her, most maudlin tendencies. A gospel choir appears barely one minute in; it remains in residence for most of the album. Sandé sings, well and interchangeably, over over a dozen tracks of stately but amorphous gloom—the sort of beige dramatics The Guardian dubbed, in 2011, “the new boring.” This is your pain with an acoustic guitar. This is your pain as a piano ballad. This is your pain with “Bleeding Love” drums. This is your pain with a small choir. This is your pain with a large choir. When Sandé finally perfects the formula, on “Highs and Lows,” it's after at least eight other tries.“Garden” would normally be a waste of Emeli—she's barely on it—but here it's triply a relief: for its sinuous, minimalist beat, for the bookending performance by British poet Áine Zion, for its being among the rare times Jay Electronica is a refreshing presence. “Tenderly” isn’t much of a song on its own, but the inclusion of the Serenje Choir—a nod to Sandé’s Zambian heritage—at least distinguishes the track. “Hurts,” the big single, takes a bit to get going, but once it does, it really does: a sudden tempo shift, handclaps, mood like gathering clouds. The tempo leaves no time for X Factor emoting, which means Sandé can provide emotion instead; her voice goes ragged and her words turn bitter (“oh man, what a tragedy, ha ha”). Being an Emeli Sandé song, it eventually turns into a power ballad like the rest, but the swell feels earned. Too much of Long Live the Angels just feels turgid.Like plenty of ambitious musicians in New York’s classical community, the clarinetist and saxophonist Ken Thomson has multiple artistic guises. He’s part of Asphalt Orchestra, a puckish street marching band that dances its covers of Björk and Meshuggah through the heart of the Lincoln Center complex. Slow/Fast is a vehicle for Thomson’s proggy approach to jazz writing and improvisation. Most recently, Thomson was inducted into the Bang on a Can All-Stars, a modern classical group that has recorded a Pulitzer-winning piece by Julia Wolfe, and commissioned new works by Tyondai Braxton and Christian Marclay.Given those varied commitments, it’s impressive that Thomson has time to develop his chamber music on the side. In these pieces, you can tell that he’s firmly a member of the contemporary post-minimalist scene. Though there are also traces of his other interests. Thaw, Thomson’s 2013 album for the string quartet known as JACK, balanced sections of instrumental aggression alongside a movement flush with lyricism (and a hat-tip to jazz pianist Don Pullen).That album presented two longer-form, multi-movement works. And on the first composition, Thomson sat in with the string quartet as a bass clarinetist—thereby suggesting a link to the rest of his discography. But Restless represents a full and complete break from Thomson’s identity as a performer. The four-movement composition that gives the album its title was written for cello and piano; the three-movement “Me Vs.” is for piano solo. One mark of the album’s success is that it’s still recognizable as one of Thomson’s projects, despite the fact that he never plays a note himself.The opening section of “Restless” starts with slowly mutating piano arpeggios that whip up a grim mood, along with some vibrato-heavy writing for the cello. Fairly standard textures, when it comes to minimalist-influenced music. But by the track’s midpoint, Thomson’s harmonies are full of feints and surprising paths away from the opening material. The way some piano chords syncopate with the cello part provides an unsettling bounce, right at the moment when Thomson gives a long, brooding line to the latter instrument. (Cellist Ashley Bathgate and pianist Karl Larson give powerful performances here.)The piece’s second movement, “Forge,” initially indulges in the harder-riffing attacks that Thomson has proved adept with in other contexts. Though instead of letting the punkish grind carry this whole section, the composer quickly softens the dynamic level. When used well, restraint can also shock. “Me Vs.” likewise navigates between stormy realms and zones of prettiness, as gentle phrases gradually emerge from dense, atonal chord clusters in the first movement (subtitled “Turn of Phrase”). When the pounding dynamics return—as a listener has ever right to expect will happen—elegant use of the sustain pedal is there to remind us of the emotional distance traveled. The second movement (“Another Second Try”) offers a gently discordant, pensive quality, before the finale combines all the work’s diverse approaches. (The last movement also adds some technically arduous runs that Larson pulls off marvelously). Overall, the unique synthesis of dissonance and consonance makes the music feel personal—and like a worthy expression of Thomson’s core concerns as a musician, whether he’s holding an instrument in his hands or not.  In 1976, composer Philip Glass and director Robert Wilson executed an ingenious end-run around the cautious classical music establishment of their day. After a short workshop and tour in Europe, the creative partners decided that Einstein on the Beach—a four-hour plus, non-narrative opera—was ready for its American debut. So they rented the Metropolitan Opera house for two nights. It was more than a sold-out success. It was a decade-defining sensation in New York’s artistic community. The brief run also set Glass and Wilson back nearly $100,000. (Renting the biggest opera house in the country wasn't cheap.) In the immediate aftermath of Einstein’s American premiere, Glass famously went back to driving his cab. But the pinnacle of this composer’s early, hardcore minimalist period—which relied on hypnotically long, not-quite-repeating melodic lines—would lead to a major-label deal before long.CBS Masterworks reissued Glass’ independent studio recording of most of the music from Einstein in 1979. Glass had shortened some scenes for the first LP issue—on the logic that without Wilson’s stage tableaus, trims were advisable. But everything that made the recording still clicks. The synths have a snarl that’s appropriate, given the opera’s Downtown New York parentage. The big ensemble riffs motor along at thrilling tempos; the “trial” scenes unfold with otherworldly ease. The spoken vocals produce deadpan surrealism. (Check out the delirious syllabic layering in “Knee Play 2.”)  And the instrumental performance of the Philip Glass Ensemble—which included wind instruments and a small chorus—is locked in beyond belief.Forty years on, this first recording of Einstein has never been bettered as an audio-only experience of the opera. A booming live performance from 1984 comes close; a ‘90s re-recording that restored the excised music isn’t anywhere as energetic or as charming. The only rival way to experience this avant-garde triumph involves doing so with Wilson’s dazzling staging added—something that’s now possible, thanks to a home-video version of Einstein’s most recent revival tour. Still, the inaugural Glass recording remains the ideal way to put the melodies and rhythms into your ears. After reissuing Einstein, CBS Masterworks signed Glass to an exclusive contract as a performer. Over the following decade, Glass delivered nine albums to the label: a haul that included two other stage pieces from his first opera trilogy, an iconic solo piano set, and several long-form works for the composer’s house band. Those protean sessions form the core of The Complete Sony Recordings. (That title reflects the subsequent corporate acquisition of CBS Records; stray Glass recordings for Sony that postdate his CBS years are also included.) This 24-CD box also offers a few exclusive bells and whistles meant to entice collectors—some of which prove revelatory. But in a classical marketplace clogged with reissue sets, the key selling point of this one is its contextual comprehensiveness. Full librettos, stage-action summaries and various liner notes are provided not just for Einstein, but for every album here. Most importantly, the box’s accompanying book provides key information on two of Glass’ most important dramatic works: the Gandhi opera Satyagraha and the ancient Egyptian tale Akhnaten—a piece that saw Glass writing for a traditional opera company, for the first time.Though it didn’t immediately take the opera world by storm in 1980, Satyagraha is now acclaimed as as one of Glass’ milestones. The commission allowed Glass to leave his various odd jobs behind and to focus on composing full time. He responded with a magisterial score that dramatized Gandhi’s time in South Africa, and that also reflected the thinker’s broader journey from newspaperman to activist to political philosopher. The second act’s climactic “Protest” has a galvanic force, thanks to Glass’ strange-but-stirring union of string orchestra and synthesizer. In the third act, Satyagraha looks ahead to the subsequent legacy of nonviolent direct action, as extended to Martin Luther King, Jr. Glass’ score closes with an ascending melody that, with its simultaneous suggestion of vulnerability and determination, makes for one of the most soul-stirring moments in contemporary opera. In an abstract theatrical touch, the entire libretto for Satyagraha is adapted from the Bhagavad-Gita—the Sanskrit text of which creates a spiritual accompaniment for the opera’s stage action. To follow the narrative on a recording, English-speaking audiences need a track-by-track translation of the Sanskrit, as well as summaries of each scene’s onstage particulars. Akhnaten works similarly, through multiple ancient languages. And Einstein’s blizzard of English fragments is also better studied with a printed lyric sheet. Prior budget-CD reissues of all the early Glass operas have ignored this. Consequently, the small hardcover book included with The Complete Sony Recordings feels as though it’s worth its weight in gold.   A lovingly produced reissue set of the opera trilogy alone could have fetched a high price. (After all, those recordings occupy ten of the CDs here.) But this box wisely expands its purview to include everything in the label’s vaults—including shorter, oft-forgotten theatrical works like The Photographer. As a result, this set allows listeners to re-encounter the decade of Glass’ rise to a position of pop-culture prominence. While Glass was often sensitive to the idea that he was betraying his classical training by become a “crossover” artist, the Sony recordings do shed light on his fascination with the way different audiences might absorb contemporary composition. His first album under the exclusive contract with CBS, 1982’s Glassworks, was a consciously scaled-down look at his aesthetic. Instead of presenting multiple hours of his gradually morphing themes, the suite of six compact pieces plays in just under 40 minutes. The standard mix is perhaps the most well-known and ubiquitous of all his recordings. But since 1982 was also the era of the Walkman, Glass and his sound designer created a version of Glassworks “specially mixed for your personal cassette player.”The inclusion of the “cassette mix” in this box marks its first digital release. Bursting with low-end thump and a punchy, less-separated stereo sound, this bonus mix of Glassworks blows away the more genteel, familiar version. Here, the album’s first emotional swing—from the pensive “Opening” to the mechanized march of “Floe”—registers even more grandly. Better than any other CD in the Sony box, it comes closest to representing the potent live sound of the Philip Glass Ensemble, when amplified in a large venue. (This mix of Glassworks also prefigures the strategy of contemporary classical imprints like New Amsterdam, which work to produce recordings in ways that will appeal to all sorts of listeners.)Not every experiment from this period paid off. Songs from the Trilogy was a useful compilation, back when recordings of Glass’ early operas represented a more substantial physical-media investment. Now it’s a curiosity. And Songs from Liquid Days is a strange misfire. Its harmonic progressions and ensemble tempos seem consistently alienated from the pop-song lyrics (written, variously, by David Byrne, Laurie Anderson, Paul Simon and Suzanne Vega). And the vocal performances—by the Roches, Linda Ronstadt and the lead from the cast of Satyagraha—often sound equally uncertain of the appropriate texture to pursue. Still, it’s a fascinating look at a composer with a long corporate leash, and a willingness to play around. More successful are albums for Glass’ ensemble, originally commissioned as scores for dance performances. These include the miniatures found on DancePieces and the opulent, side-length statements on Dance Nos. 1-5. And the composer’s popular reputation hit a new level with the release of Solo Piano—still one of the most fervently beloved entries in his vast catalog. This record gave fans an intimate encounter with Glass’ solo-instrumental style, and also offered premieres of major pieces like “Metamorphosis” and “Wichita Sutra Vortex.” The former is a piece that has been admired and performed by Blood Orange. The latter is a work that many elite classical virtuosos fail to pull off with exuberance of the more technically limited Glass.In 1993, Glass jumped from CBS/Sony to Nonesuch—a label that he’d been sneaking movie soundtracks to, on the side, for some time. Before long, Glass would establish his own imprint, Orange Mountain Music (which remains the place to find his latter-day chamber music, operas and symphonic statements). But Sony has also stayed in the Glass business, here and there. It recorded Itaipu/The Canyon—one of Glass’ early forays into orchestral writing for its own sake—in 1993. (Glass would quickly outstrip this effort with several later symphonies.) Thanks to the label’s association with Yo-Yo Ma, this box gets to claim Glass’ fine soundtrack to Naqoyqatsi (on which the cellist performs).Sony also has the rights to Passages, Glass’ 1990 reunion with Ravi Shankar, his onetime mentor. On that album, each composer arranged themes by the other. Not everything there comes off seamlessly, but it’s a blast to hear Shankar’s adaptation of Glassian melody. The box also gathers obscure sets like Organ Works—an interesting series of Glass arrangements, performed by Donald Joyce. There’s also a rarities collection titled Recent Recordings. It’s a fun listen, even if it contains some recordings that aren’t all that recent. (A short Glass Ensemble performance at the 1984 Olympics torch-lighting ceremony? Sure, let’s have it!)Aside from the obscure “cassette mix” of Glassworks, however, the exclusive material advertised on the packaging doesn’t have much to do with the true value of this box. The real attraction is the half of the set that sits in the excellent-to-iconic zone of Glass’ catalog. A lot of that material has been widely available for years—though often without important contextual material that can aid deeper immersion. This reverent, smartly produced set fixes that problem. In doing so, The Complete Sony Recordings represents a worthy completion of the company’s original investment in a young composer.The music industry is rarely generous with fairytale successes, but the closest thing to one was bequeathed last year upon 22-year-old German-Haitian songwriter Bibi Bourelly. Discovered on Instagram, Bourelly was introduced to Kanye West and, more broadly, to the songwriting industry in perpetual need of young creatives to lend the stars some trickle-up swag. After some abortive writing for Usher, Bourelly found a taker in Rihanna, whose albums are a pretty reliable microcosm of songwriting trends; of her prolific output, Rih cut the brash pre-Anti single “Bitch Better Have My Money” and the sloshed torch song “Higher.” The songs could scarcely be different in production—the former set to grinding trap by Travis Scott, the latter to relatively tranquil soul—but Bourelly’s influence is stark and clear. Where former Rih surrogates like Ester Dean assembled songs explicitly around hooks, retrofitting words and meaning later, Bourelly’s approach is more that of an open-mic songwriter: sprawling, unfiltered, every lyric sung to the breaking point. The Rihanna stint turned into a deal with Def Jam and several solo singles, compiled on an EP this May: the on-the-nose Free the Real (Pt. 1). Unfiltered was certainly the aim, or at least a version of authenticity filtered through folk and acoustic rock. Single “Sally” is a bluesy ruckus of handclaps and scuzzed-up guitar, “Ego” twangy and stalking, “What If” almost grunge. Though the EP perhaps demonstrated more promise than mastery, it was certainly her own.Pt. 2 is much of the same: more notebook sketches of titles: (“Poet,” “Untitled”) and more acoustic cuts that bear little resemblance to pop, R&B, or—refreshingly—the vast swath of alt-pop artists tipped as her peers. Bourelly’s age and pop gigs have saddled her with comparisons to precocious pop quirkers like Alessia Cara and Lorde, but they’re a poor fit. Her actual predecessors are closer to PJ Harvey or Janis Joplin, and—for better and worse—she comes off less as a pre-branded star and more as a writer finding her voice in real time. Her literal voice is unsurprisingly strong and versatile: sometimes zero-fucks blasé, sometimes scratchy and vulnerable, and sometimes—as on her Rihanna ballads—a confrontational belt. But her writing voice is the main draw: the voice of a girl who grew up on hip-hop and saw no reason why it couldn’t coexist with folk-rock or country. There’s perennial talk, of course, about young artists growing up in the streaming era being unbound by genres; in particular, 2016 has found almost every pop star dabbling in acoustic genres (cynically, perhaps driven by Top 40’s playlists shrinking and the increasing dominance of country and AC formats). Bourelly sounds like it was her idea all along.The downside to being unformed is there’s still a lot you’ve got to get out of your system. On this EP, that’s “Poet.” It’s got the slickest production on the album: rock-radio sheen, with precisely timed strings and backing-singer interjections. But it’s also got the hook “you’re my Kurt Cobain,” and its other metaphors—cocaine, rock’n’roll—aren’t much better. Bourelly’s other material, thankfully, is far more compelling: the prickly guitar intro and plainspoken disses of “Flowers” (“I may smoke a lot of marijuana/But I’m not your little whore”); the assured stomp of “Fool,” and especially the single “Ballin.” It’s the best song written to date about the precarious quasi-fame one can fall into as a rising artist, where you can write multiple Rihanna hits, make the magazine rounds and 25 Under 25 roundups, sing on Colbert, be highly Googleable, and yet still be broke as fuck. Bourelly begins the track by announcing, as casually as you’d mention a papercut, getting fired from Old Navy; then, with this-too-will-pass assurance, she continues through the details: dodging landlords, jumping subway turnstiles, living off ramen and hot sauce, feeling ambivalent about the paparazzi who are one degree of separation away. As a montage of the music-industry fairytale as it looks to those living it, it’s striking. But as a snapshot of Bibi Bourelly’s career, judging by her material it may soon prove itself quite modest. Scott Morgan’s trajectory as Loscil, the moniker under which he produces his solo work, seems more befitting of a biologist than an ambient music veteran. Over the past sixteen years, Morgan has shaped his electronic sound around subjects like subatomic particles (Triple Point), shadowy ocean depths (Submers), shore life (First Narrows), and the traits of airborne substances (Plume). Even the intention behind his free-flowing arrangements is scientific, as Morgan has often acknowledged his aim to recreate the properties of water in music. But where his previous albums have aspired, almost methodically, to map the movement and texture of wave energy, Monument Builders, Morgan’s eleventh album, maps a more human, and less quantifiable, concept: life’s resistance to dark and destructive forces.Extending the notions of community that were brought to a head on his recent EP for Greta—a charity album to raise money for a friend's child diagnosed with bone cancer—Morgan now charts the progression of life from the arid wasteland of “Drained Lake” to the first tiny sprouts of growth in “Weeds.” Monument Builders is a highly visual album, a mosaic of images depicting construction, erasure, devastation, redemption, and transformation. The sounds of micro-cassette recorders, decrepit samples, and grinding chains of percussion evoke a strong sense of place, the same way fuzz on a vintage videotape evokes age. “Red Tide,” with its layered percussive onslaught and brass like steaming train whistles, announces the rising of the sea, just as the cascading pianos of “Deceiver” very nearly resembles rain falling after a thunderstorm.  As is typical in his work, Morgan uses the first four songs of the album to mount tension. Darkness lingers in the title track, which builds around a single quivering note. The anticipation culminates in “Straw Dogs,” a menacing track with screeching horns, named in honor of anti-humanist philosopher John Gray’s book of the same name, which speaks to the dangers of placing humanity at the center of the universe. The ominous edge behind the compositions would seem to indicate that Morgan subscribes to Gray’s ideas about our own propensity for geological and social destruction. But the album’s three remaining songs suggest something slightly more optimistic.“Deceiver,” with its weepy, penitent piano, eventually gives way to a high-pitch wailing that expresses acute feelings of grief. Gray’s philosophy seems to appear again  in “Anthropocene”—the name for our current geological epoch, marked by harmful human centrality—and the song’s pulsating, intense bass line drives our guilt and grief through moments of self-reflection, mourning, and change. By the time we arrive at “Weeds,” the album’s final song, we are ready to confront punishment. Only we discover, from a murmur-like flicker of synth notes, that what awaits us are the sounds of human voices crying out from the dark. Among our distress and destruction, Morgan concludes, hopefully, that life persists.In this way, Monument Builders is oddly reminiscent of “Directive,” one of Robert Frost’s last poems, which also advances ideas of survival and endurance. Much like with Builders, in “Directive” we follow a guide through a place of decay and dissolution. At the end of our journey, our guide says to us, “Here are your waters and your watering place./Drink and be whole again beyond confusion.” Scott Morgan has made a career of showing us waters and watering places. With Monument Builders, we are finally invited to drink.  Communicating unbridled enthusiasm the same way Johnny Rotten once vocalized a sneer, Peter Stampfel’s singing is the type that might either drive people from rooms or pull them closer. An underground musician in the early 1960s and an underground musician now, the fiddler-banjoist’s gleeful howl has always framed his music as belonging to some faction of the other, as symbolic as a fuzzed-out guitar once seemed to be. Except in the 21st century, with the out-of-control charge of the Stooges’ “Search and Destroy” most lately heard in an Audi ad campaign, Stampfel’s voice continues to be exactly as untamable as it was in the ’60s, an aural pointer to a wild bohemia.On Holiday For Strings, the 78-year-old Stampfel remains in a spirit of full folky joy, an embodiment of old-time string band chaos before its somber post-O Brother, Where Art Thou reconstruction. An early convert to Harry Smith’s Anthology of American Folk Music and its vision of an “old, weird America” (in Greil Marcus’ term), Stampfel took more to the weird than the old. But having hung on to his weird for three-quarters of a century, he now gets to be both, and his personable croak finds unlikely entrance points to unlikely songs. Recording with an ensemble dubbed the Brooklyn & Lower Manhattan Fiddle/Mandolin Swarm (for its buzzing three-fiddle-minimum arrangements), the result is actually a chaotic big band that gives Stampfel a sympathetic and ever-changing bed for his singing. It is the sound of people making music together, pianos and steel guitars appearing alongside other vibrations as needed, playing songs entirely dictated by what might be called “the folk process.” With only two of the songs credited fully to Stampfel (the instrumentals “Lily” and “Lonely Goth Girl”), the rest are modified traditional or contemporary numbers or songs with blurrier origins (like a version of the fiddle instrumental “Blackberry Blossom” with lyrics by Michelle Shocked).As co-founder of the ’60s/’70s folk-imploding Holy Modal Rounders, Stampfel was the first to use the word “psychedelic” in a recorded song on “Hesitation Blues” in 1964 and going semi-electric with everybody else a few years later. But Stampfel has remained a fully committed folkie through decades of bands and creative partnerships, most lately with New York songwriter Jeffrey Lewis. It is here that Stampfel’s very vocal enthusiasm generates meaning within his music, providing a source for his long-term creative energy as much as his in-the-moment expression. On Holiday For Strings, Stampfel takes hold of traditional tunes like “Johnny Get Your Gun” and “Yankee Doodle,” turning the latter into a topical stomp on gun nuts, “Honky Doody.” But the album finds its heart in less-traditional borrowings, like introducing Joe Meek’s 1962 space-age instrumental “Telstar” into the folk canon.While there’s fun to be had, the album’s best performances come on a trio of tender pop songs, each sounding like a more unhinged version of the recent albums of standards arranged for string bands by Stampfel’s former jamming buddy and one-time roommate, Bob Dylan. Just as with Dylan’s Shadows in the Night, it might be easy enough to giggle while Stampfel’s voice warbles and breaks through “I Can’t Stop Loving You,” Ray Charles’ countrypolitan hit written by Don Gibson. But, as with Dylan, that would be to miss Stampfel’s deeply human and well-read performance, as cracked as Gibson’s original is smooth. The same holds true of the album’s two most devastating moments, a nearly straight cover of Lou Reed’s “Cremation,” from 1992’s Magic and Loss, rewritten lightly as “Cold Black Sea,” and “Star in the Wind,” written with Stampfel’s former girlfriend/collaborator, the one-named Antonia. Sounding like something Dylan might get to yet, the words come sourced from a mid-’50s installment of Walt Kelly’s comic strip, Pogo, a poem by the artist about a daughter who died in infancy. There is a modesty to Stampfel’s half-century of small-scale folk detonations, but also an earnest and inviting curiosity. His verve spills into textual form via grammar-busting liner notes (though Stampfel is also a professional copyeditor), like a musical equivalent of a Facebook wall crammed with annotated YouTube clips. As filled with excitement to be playing and sharing music in his 70s as he was as a teen, Holiday For Strings works just as well as a recruiting poster for the future folkies of America. Like punk, the anarchic arrangements contain the message that anybody can do this, but Stampfel also makes a pretty excellent argument for why it’s still worth doing.Christian Marclay was one of turntablism’s earliest pioneers. Throughout the 1980s, the multimedia artist plundered the discographies of others: scratching and refracting one Hendrix jam into a fresh psychedelic swirl, or layering several pieces by Chopin or Louis Armstrong into new soundscapes. Less indebted to hip-hop sonics than to the genre-blending aesthetics of John Zorn, Marclay eventually began to collaborate with a range of players that included Thurston Moore and Ikue Mori. Since his 24-hour installation film The Clock became a smash hit in contemporary art circles, Marclay has noticeably scaled back his turntablist practice. In recent years, he’s collaborated more with musicians through the interface of his collage-style “graphic scores.” But he still occasionally busts out his cartons of vinyl, as he did with the cellist Okkyung Lee for a 2014 performance at London’s Cafe Oto. Now released under the title Amalgam, the concert is easily one of Marclay’s most invigorating performances as a turntablist this century—and leagues more interesting than a pair of gigs released on limited-edition vinyl in conjunction with a 2015 gallery show in London.A good deal of Amalgam’s success has to do with Marclay’s duet partner, Okkyung Lee. The cellist has demonstrated her avant-improv bona fides on her collaboration with piano great Cecil Taylor. And her own compositions display Lee’s skills with lyricism and melody, in between passages of crunch and noise. Appropriately, she has as many ideas for coaxing sounds from the cello as Marclay has strategies for abusing vinyl. This mutual acuity gives solid shape to their 36-minute, fully improvised performance.After Marclay opens with samples that employ shifts in playback speed, Lee’s cello can be heard quietly, insistently repeating a short jagged phrase—a cellist’s imitation of a turntable scratch. Lee’s development of this brief figure gradually incorporates longer-held tones and broader fingerboard swoops, both of which help a listener identify her cello as the source of these particular sounds. By then, Marclay has begun splicing together noisier shards.Not long after these discrete positions have been staked out by the two players, they pivot to blend their approaches. Occasionally, a figure that could have been produced by the live string player is revealed to be a Marclay sample, plucked from some string-laden LP. Metallic scrapings or atmospheric trails of sound production can seem like fodder from a vintage recording—until an expressive, violent burst in the line shows that this has all come from Lee’s cello.This back and forth journey, between easy recognition of the different players and more ambiguous duo textures, creates much of the performance’s excitement at a minute-by-minute level. The larger structure follows a loose, three-movement style, with a quieter middle section that takes over in the fourteenth minute. Unlike many of Marclay’s past duo recordings with other artists, this session with Lee doesn’t include many recognizable samples. (You don’t even get any Anthony Braxton breaks that have cropped up in the turntablist’s collaborations with Elliott Sharp or Günter Müller.) But after this inspired performance, what lingers is the dazzling newness that Lee and Marclay create by exploring the outer fringes of timbre.When hardcore punk emerged in the early ’80s, it was partially a reaction to the tired old rules of bloated commercial rock’n’roll. But it didn’t take long for hardcore to start devising its own rules, which is why the Minutemen were such a welcome jolt to the scene. They weren’t outsiders; formed in 1980 in the southern Los Angeles community of San Pedro, they often opened for neighboring hardcore trailblazers Black Flag, whose guitarist Greg Ginn signed the Minutemen to his SST label after the first time he saw them play. They had punk bona fides, too: bassist Mike Watt, guitarist D. Boon, and drummer George Hurley were working-class kids, sons of a sailor, a mechanic, and a machinist. They all held onto day jobs and stayed loyal to San Pedro throughout the band’s existence. In outline, the Minutemen’s sound fit with punk’s  minimal, straight-to-the-point ethos. One of their most quoted lyrics—“We jam econo,” later used as the title for a 2005 Minutemen documentary—referred literally to the cheap Econoline van that they drove and slept in to save money. But it perfectly characterized their taut, efficient music, doled out in quick jolts —most tunes lasted less than two minutes—in order to move onto new ideas as fast as possible. Even the short, sharp sound of the five-syllable “we jam econo,” which the band would sometimes shorten further to simply “econo,” demonstrates its own point.Yet as compact as they were, Minutemen songs sounded nothing like hardcore punk. Boon’s guitar was scratchy and wiry; Watt’s bass was busy and melodic; Hurley’s drumming was polyrhythmic and syncopated. Some tracks were like fractured jazz, some like moody folk, some like off-speed funk. They weren’t interested in pure volume or aggression; what drew the trio to punk was the chance to play anything they wanted. “Punk rock doesn’t have to mean hardcore or one style of music,” Watt told Flipside in 1985. “It can mean freedom and going crazy and being personal with your art….it really blows people’s minds because here we are the most hardcore-looking bunch out there and our music is the furthest from it.” In a scene that was already drawing lines in the sand about what was and wasn’t hardcore, declaring that kind of liberation was pretty rebellious.One of the most famous Minutemen songs, “History Lesson (Part II),” sounds like a homage to the hardcore milieu that birthed them. “Me and Mike Watt played for years/and punk rock changed our lives,” Boon sings matter-of-factly, over a gentle melody inspired by the Velvet Underground’s “Here She Comes Now.” But the tune was also a plea for acceptance into hardcore circles that didn’t know what to make of the Minutemen. As fan Mike Brady said in Craig Ibarra's San Pedro punk oral history A Wailing of a Town, “The Minutemen shocked everybody when they first saw them, because you went to punk gigs expecting poor music. A lot of the bands weren’t that good back then, they could barely play.” Or as Erik Korte of fellow punk band Throbbing Members bluntly put it, “They just weren’t that hardcore.” That opinion was often shared by audiences. The first time they opened for Black Flag, the Minutemen were showered with spit from the crowd; even two years later, during a headlining set in their own hometown, they were booed off the stage.“I wrote (History Lesson - Part II) to try to humanize us,” Watt said in Our Band Could Be Your Life: Scenes from the American Indie Underground, 1981-1991, Michael Azerrad’s book on punk history who title comes from a “History Lesson - Part II” lyric. “People thought we were spacemen, but we were just Pedro corndogs... You could be us, this could be you. We’re not that much different from you cats.”“History Lesson - Part II” appeared on the Minutemen’s third album, 1984’s Double Nickels on the Dime, a two-record set that showed this band actually was pretty different, even when they fit in. Most of the album’s 45 songs were fast and short, but Double Nickels as a whole is not really “econo.” It’s as much an art record as a punk record, using found sounds, off-the-cuff experiments, cut-and-paste lyrics, radical politics, and references to all kinds of art that influenced the trio. It reveals a band eager to try things even if they don’t work out (one side is self-deprecatingly called “Side Chaff”). Double Nickels’ closest parallel isn’t any punk album, but the alternately tight/loose sprawl of Captain Beefheart and His Magic Band’s Trout Mask Replica.The concepts underpinning Double Nickels came about partially by accident. In early 1983, the Minutemen had recorded enough songs to make a single album. But before they finished it, their friends and SST labelmates, Minneapolis trio Hüsker Dü, came to town and recorded the two-LP set Zen Arcade in less than a week. Watt took this as a dare: if their pals could make a double album, why couldn’t the Minutemen? (He would later add a playful “take that, Hüskers!” to the liner notes of Double Nickels).They  were certainly up to the task. They had already made seven records in just three years as a band—two full lengths and five EPs—and songs continued to pour out of them. They wrote and recorded 20 more in just a few weeks, with all three band members contributing music and lyrics, though Boon sang on most tracks. In total, Double Nickels took just six days of recording and one all-night mixing session. But because the double-album idea emerged in the middle of the process, finding a unifying concept was a tougher job. Zen Arcade had an overarching story—that of a young boy running away from home—but the most the Minutemen could come up with was two smaller schemes.First, Watt borrowed a concept from Pink Floyd’s 1969 double album Ummagumma: each side included a solo song by one band member, and the rest of that side’s songs were chosen by that person (side four got all the leftover songs, and was thus deemed the “chaff” side). Second, Watt chose the album title and artwork as a response to Sammy Hagar’s insipid 1984 hit “I Can’t Drive 55.” “Double nickels” meant the 55 mph national speed limit that Watt is seen driving on the album cover—a way to say he’d rather live safely and play radical music than the other way around. The two concepts overlapped in snippets of car engine sounds at the head of each side—a suggestion from SST’s Joe Carducci—which were recorded directly from each band members’ own vehicle.These ideas were clever but perhaps too subtle (Watt has admitted that few outside of the group caught onto either reference). The Minutemen’s aesthetic was never about grand concepts anyway, but about curiosity and openness and hunger for something new. They were interested in highbrow and lowbrow, mainstream and underground, influenced as much by Blue Oyster Cult and Creedence Clearwater Revival as Wire and the Pop Group. They were also as political as any punk band at the time, but their songs were more about complex issues that you had to research than generic anti-Reagan rants. Take the opening lines of Double Nickels’ “Viet Nam”: “Let’s say I got a number/That number’s 50,000/That’s 10% of 500,000.” As Michael Fournier points out in his 33/3 book on the album, that sounds at first like random math, but it turns out that roughly 50,000 Americans were killed in the Vietnam War, as opposed to over 500,000 North Vietnamese. These kind of granular details were the work of homegrown intellectuals, DIY aesthetes: when the Minutemen argued about history or culture during band practice, they’d jump in their van and drive to the library to settle the conflict.On Double Nickels, this mindset produces songs that are concrete and abstract, bold and subtle, workmanlike and postmodern. “Shit From an Old Notebook” sounds like a blunt screed: “Let the products sell themselves!/Fuck advertising and commercial psychology!” screams Boon over a circling Watt/Hurley rhythm. Yet its creation was less about protest than chance technique: Watt pieced together the song’s words from scraps of notebook pages he found in Boon’s van. Similar juxtapositions arise in “One Reporter’s Opinion,” which at first seems to be Boon’s critique of Watt: “What can be romantic to Mike Watt?/He’s only a skeleton!” But Watt wrote the song himself, inspired by the perspective-switching narrative voice in James Joyce’s ultra-dense classic Ulysses. (Watt’s obsession with Joyce also emerges in the instrumental “June 16th,” titled after the date on which Ulysses takes place).Throughout Double Nickels, chance experiments and artistic influences abound. “Do You Want New Wave or Do You Want the Truth?,” a slow acoustic song with hard-biting lyrics, is a study of how words are manipulated —“should a word have two meanings? Should a word serve the truth?”—inspired by the semiotics theories of Umberto Eco. Watt’s solo song, “Take 5, D.,” was a response to Boon thinking his lyrics were too far out. To be more “real,” Watt read words from a note that a landlady left for a friend—“Hope we can rely on you not to use the shower”—followed by passages of improvised guitar. Hurley’s solo tune—which he chose to open his side, to the surprise of Watt and Boon—is a smattering of cycling percussion and wordless scatting.Some of the experimentation on Double Nickels was born from necessity. Forced to generate lots of songs quickly, the Minutemen turned to San Pedro comrades for help. Some lyrics were written by non-band-members (Watt admitted that the band never even met one of the contributors, Joe Brewer, cousin of fellow San Pedro musician and Saccharine Trust singer Jack Brewer). They took other input, too. Though they had recorded a version of Creedence Clearwater Revival’s “Don’t Look Now” in the studio, Carducci suggested including a live version instead. He liked its field-recording quality, particularly the way the crowd chattered casually throughout. Watt agreed without even hearing the tape first.The Minutemen’s use of outside contributions on Double Nickels wasn’t just about experimentation. It was also an attempt to foster community. Watt wanted the band to be, as he put it, “a prism” for the whole San Pedro punk scene. “Mike was asking everybody for lyrics,” explained Jack Brewer, who contributed a lyric to Double Nickels. “It made people feel like they were a part of it. ‘Hey, I have some lyrics on the Minutemen record!’ They were sharing their success; they didn’t just keep it to themselves.’ ”If Double Nickels had been nothing but experiments and collaborations, it would have still been interesting, but it wouldn’t have sold out of its original 10,000-copy run nor gotten near-universal acclaim for decades. Most of the album’s 45 songs are tight, catchy, and infinitely repeatable, with D. Boon’s knifing guitar and untethered vocals reacting to Watt and Hurley’s complex yet pogo-ready rhythms. The music is spoken with a vocabulary the Minutemen created themselves and were fully fluent in by just their third full-length. That’s perhaps clearest when they take on other bands’ songs: on the “chaff” side they translate Van Halen’s “Ain’t Talkin’ ’Bout Love” and Steely Dan’s “Dr. Wu” into a new language.That language was so developed and distinct that it’s proven hard to mimic in the three decades since Double Nickels came out. Watt predicted this a bit in his 1985 Flipside interview, discussing why the Minutemen don’t get airplay. “I think one of our problems with radio is that we don’t write songs, we write rivers,” he said. “We play against each other, guitar and bass; we don’t set up a background for our narrative.”As a result, few bands who’ve come along in the decades since actually sound much like the Minutemen. (The band would go on to make two more full lengths and a handful of EPs—including one Project: Mersh that somewhat-jokingly tried to exploit some of the poppier sides of their songwriting on Double Nickels—before D. Boon died tragically in an automobile accident in late 1985). They have influenced many: the Red Hot Chili Peppers dedicated Blood Sugar Sex Magik to Watt, Pavement was named after a line in the Minutemen song “Fake Contest,” Unwound and Sebadoh recorded Minutemen covers, and Jeff Tweedy wrote a song called “D. Boon” for Uncle Tupelo’s Still Feel Gone.They’ve likely inspired more people with their ethics and attitude than their sound. As a model, they are one of the purest DIY punk bands, on a par with groups famous for independence like Minor Threat and Fugazi, Beat Happening, and the Minutemen’s godfathers Black Flag. But the legacy of Double Nickels on the Dime isn’t just that the Minutemen did things themselves. It’s also that they tried everything, ignoring artificial barriers between forms of art, classes of culture, and kinds of influence. “One of the reasons we play all these kinds of musics is for them—to see how seriously they take ‘No Rules’ and ‘Anarchy,’” Watt said to Maximum Rock’n’Roll in 1984. “We throw all this soft music, folk music, jazz, etc. not only to avoid getting caught in just one style, but also to show them that ‘see, you didn’t want any rules— this is what you wanted.’ I know it’s hard for them. It’s easier when it’s all set up for you.”Every year, the film industry reliably churns out a new biographical boxing film with aspirations towards artistry and, hopefully, awards. This year’s entrant is Ben Younger’s Bleed for This, starring the famously boorish Miles Teller (Whiplash, Fantastic Four) as Vinny Paz, a world championship boxer on the road to recovery from a devastating car accident. It was executive produced by Martin Scorsese, in itself setting up an unfortunate parallel to the  already-existing Raging Bull. The soundtrack, meanwhile, pairs selections from artists like Willis Earl Beal with some period-specific ’80s glam, and, intriguingly, several selections from the composer and performer Julia Holter.  Holter provides ten of the eighteen songs on this soundtrack, each a piece of new music from her. It is definitely an odd fit, and the soundtrack doesn’t make any efforts to make sense of it: In its first few tracks we are treated to selections from Billy Squier and Bad Company, selections that serve a scene-setting purpose in the film that they do not serve here. Songs from Willis Earl Beal’s 2013 album Nobody Knows are peppered throughout to add a dash of emotional depth, but Beal’s probing and leftfield soul is mismatched with the film’s rote aggression. This disjunction is even more apparent when Holter’s music appears in the film. For the most part, her contributions are short, almost weightless, instrumental pieces that lean towards ambient. Almost none of the pieces are over a minute long, making them closer to sketches. In the film, they are deployed where easy emotion needs to be summoned.  No matter how beautiful some these tracks can be, they are forced to serve utilitarian ends: “Fighting Dele,” one of the most well-executed pieces, only exists to heighten the tension of Vinny Paz’s title fight against Gilbert Dele. Instead of the old tricks of heavy breathing, audible heartbeats, shaky camera angles, or even silence, Holter’s song is used to make a difficult moment in the fight (right before the telegraphed victory) seem ethereal, almost divine. The strategy ends up making her music feel silly when tied to the film. Worse, Holter’s songs are given the hoary old agenda of making the aggressive and masculine edges of the film seem more sensitive, softer, and intimate. Bleed for This does not break any stereotypes about boxing films. It follows a narrative arc, a cast of characters, and explores a set of emotions (failure, redemption, victory) that are well trodden. The score’s best songs, “Fighting Duran,” (a grandly wrought three-minute ambient song), “Home Movies,” (a short minimalist epic of luxuriant and melancholic strings) and “Vinny’s Trumph” (the score’s triumphantly horn-filled closer) make clear just how mismatched Holter’s sensibilities are to this ultimately lazy and formulaic film, filled with scenes of sweaty gyms, casino floors, and other places of contest. Holter admirably writes music that attempts to complicate these spaces, but in the end she is mismatched with this film. And that’s a bummer, because any film would be lucky to have her contributions.  Holter’s work for Bleed for This is her first film score. Without a doubt her music will continue to appear in film because it is subtle, spectral, and densely packed with energy without being plodding or gaudy. Bleed for This like any run-of-the-mill white-elephant film vying for critical success is going to do away with those kinds of qualities, in order to activate base pleasures in a movie viewer. This film’s palette of emotions and events is only made of primary colors, while Holter’s music often exists in a spectrum that is murkier and less defined. The kind of film that Holter’s work may be suited for will more fluidly incorporate the hypnotic pace of her compositions. It will be a film that chooses not to retell the same story over and over again.  The story of the Men goes something like this: In 2011, the Brooklyn four-piece, led by guitarists and singers Mark Perro and Nick Chiericozzi, release Leave Home on Sacred Bones, the band’s second and first widely-available LP. Its strangely inviting blend of post-hardcore, noise-metal and shoegaze is a shot in the arm to the genre. The band’s profile rises. And then—surprisingly, inexorably—the Men ditch the art-punk game for classic-rock traditionalism over the course of three short years, embracing Tom Petty, the Band, and Crazy Horse for three often-brilliant records.  By 2014, the end of that initial prolific run, the Men (by then a quintet) had charted a straight path from indie rock's outer reaches (Leave Home) to its catchier, college-rock middle ground (2012’s near-perfect Open Your Heart) to something approaching dad rock for drunks (2013’s New Moon, 2014’s underrated Tomorrow’s Hits). In that time, the Men drove steadily away from noise and bombast toward harmonies and hooks, without entirely scrubbing away the grime that first defined them.Devil Music spins the car around 180 degrees and heads roaring back toward the psych-punk abandon of the Men’s early years. Released on the band’s own We Are the Men Records, and the crew’s first since parting ways with producer/multi-instrumentalist Ben Greenberg, the caustic, stubbornly lo-fi Devil Music sizzles like a hot coal—the Stooges, MC5, and Mudhoney compressed into an angry little ball. On first listen, the album’s nine tracks can sound a little half-baked, like the band simply set up some recording gear in their practice room and ran through a few songs they had yet to entirely finish. Which is pretty much what they did: The quartet tracked nearly everything on Devil Music, including vocals, live to 1/2-inch tape in their basement practice space over the course of a single weekend. Some of the lyrics were improvised on the spot. While the feral recording quality is certainly an asset, the songwriting isn’t as nuanced or well-considered as it is on their best tracks—“Open Your Heart,” “Half Angel Half Light,” “Different Days.” Lead-single “Lion’s Den”—in many ways the record’s mission statement—is a stumbling panic attack of screeching guitar, crashing cymbals, and skronking sax.So, yes, the melodies are harder to find. Though clearly that was the point: The Men weren’t trying to make a record you could sing along to. Devil Music is sweat, heat, and brute force above all. The song titles themselves suggest what the music does to your body: “Hit the Ground,” “Fire,” “Gun,” “Violate.” “Dreamer” is an amphetamine rush of Motörhead riffs and narcotized synths; the snarling, feedback-drenched guitars on “Violate” sound like they might rip through your chest, like Lou Reed’s paint-peeling solos on “I Heard Her Call My Name.” The Men sound exhausted by the urban grind, yet defiant. “I’m sick and tired of the city ’cause it gives me no place to hide,” Perro half-screams on “Fire.” On “Hit the Ground,” he vows to burn the whole place to the ground. Ragers are in the Men’s wheelhouse, and they pull these songs off with savage aplomb. The addition of that skronking sax, which pops up throughout the record, is a welcome addition to the Men’s manic sound. Few other bands display such a giddy, almost childlike enthusiasm for rock ‘n’ roll catharsis. And Devil Music is an endearing testament to that passion.Yet it’s disappointing that the Men felt compelled, for really the first time, to look backward. A band that built a legacy out of defying expectations and embracing a grab bag of genres for each new record—folk, classic rock, post-rock, noise, SST indie—returns to their scuzz-punk beginnings to make the most uniform album of their career. The Men are at their best when they’re testing the limits of their abilities, singing harmonies and writing hooks that wrench them out of their comfort zones. For all its wrath and fury, Devil Music feels safe and predictable. It’s a hell of a party, but it’s one we’ve been to before.Since the late ’90s, Australian multi-instrumentalist Oren Ambarchi has composed drone metal and free jazz, sculpted ambient soundscapes and collaborated with many (if not most) of experimental music's biggest names. Over his prolific career, Ambarchi has toured with Sunn O))), played with Boris and Merzbow, drummed with Keiji Haino—and that's just a drop in the bucket. In many ways, Ambarchi is a quintessential musician’s musician: an adept drummer and guitarist, hugely respected within his own scene, whose fans study his work like stoned math majors pouring over a Mandelbrot set. Whether inspired by krautrock, metal, or jazz, Ambarchi’s work demands patience and attention, but along with his singular musicianship, Ambarchi's work reaches for the extremes of human experience, the sorrowful, the sublime.On his latest album, the three-part, forty-minute Hubris, Ambarchi teams up with an army of avant-garde musicians, among them Jim O’Rourke, Crys Cole, Keith Fullerton Whitman, Mark Fell, and Ricardo Villalobos. O’Rourke is a frequent collaborator with Ambarchi (together the two made 2011’s Indeed and last year’s Behold) and his presence is felt throughout the record. Both musicians are experts at locking into grooves, then breaking out of them in strange, unthinkable ways. On “Hubris Pt. 1,” Ambarchi lays down an arpeggiated guitar loop which serves as a baseline for his collaborators to play off and the track’s 22-minute runtime provides an ample canvas. According to Ambarchi, the composition was inspired by New Wave and disco—particularly Wang Chung’s soundtrack to the 1985 thriller To Live and Die in L.A.—but its sound and structure owe much to the patient loops of minimal techno. As with some forms of meditation, where practitioners are taught to focus on subtle differences in the body’s perception of the world, Ambarchi and his partners introduce ripples that swell into waves. While it's hard to parse who is responsible which sounds, O’Rourke's guitar-synth stands out, evoking retro graphics, John Carpenter soundtracks, and William Friedkin thrillers. Similar to the Field, Ambarchi’s loops instill a sense of wonder with their unflagging momentum, but while Axel Willner has a tendency toward big crescendos, “Pt. 1” stays rooted. Tension is heightened, but there's only a small release, just a fading sense that something beautiful is gone. “Pt. 3,” which includes contributions from Villalobos and DNA’s Arto Lindsay, is a different sort of beast—as unhinged and electric as anything Ambarchi has recorded. Villalobos, a godhead in the minimal techno arena, once sampled a small portion of Christian Vander’s “Baba Yaga La Sorciere,” turning it into 17 minutes of rhythmic ecstasy. Similarly, Villalobos, along with drummers Joe Talia and Will Guthrie, bring a circularity to “Pt. 3,” with Lindsay's guitar adding a no wave edge to the funk-prog undercurrent. Similarly, Villalobos, along with drummers Joe Talia and Will Guthrie, bring a similar circularity to “Pt. 3,” with Lindsay's guitar adding a no wave edge to the funk-prog undercurrent. Unlike “Pt. 1,” which stays within set confines, “Part 3” sheds formal constraints gleefully. By the time for Ambarchi’s guitars join Lindsay's, the track has become a maximalist hurricane of weird. Taken from a distance, Hubris is shaped something like an hourglass, with “Pt. 2” serving as a connector between the two halves. Tranquil guitar and sampled voices serve as an homage to Albert Marcoeur, a French art rocker known for sampling nursery rhymes, paints a pastoral picture. The track serves as a palette cleanser between the ethereal momentum of “Pt. 1” and the chaos of “Pt. 3.” It also puts a spotlight back on Ambarchi’s guitar, which is ostensibly what he is most famous for. In some ways “Pt. 2” is a synecdoche for Ambarchi himself. Few artists could assemble a group of musicians like that those found on Hubris at all, but Ambarchi lets everyone do their part, then fade into the background. It's the difference between hubris and vision. The fourth full-length by Miami trio Jacuzzi Boys begins with frontman/guitarist Gabriel Alcala imagining a feeling of intoxication from leaving the house while carrying a knife: “These days, everything’s too nice/Walk around, it’s another day/Goin’ out with my lucky blade.” If he has an issue with things being too prettied-up for his liking, he still chose to express himself with a song drenched in a polished, edgeless sheen. And other than a stylized hint of violence, the song’s psychedelic pop exterior and trailing “oohs” leave us with no deeper an impression than a passing daydream.It’s not like Ping Pong’s sound de-fangs the passion of Jacuzzi Boys, but there’s certainly no sense of danger or even friction hidden in the album’s grooves. In strictly musical terms, Alcala’s smooth vocal facility gave him a “mature” aura early on in Jacuzzi Boys’ career. These days, he’s developed into a more-than-capable singer. The problem is when he asks, “Do you feel what I feel?/I feel it every day,” he doesn’t give us any inkling of what he’s feeling, nor does he really entice us to figure it out.If Alcala and his bandmates consider their music a kind of blade that protects them and serves as their sword against generic uniformity, they need to be more honest with themselves about how unthreatening their music actually is. The band’s name conjures images of party times in frothing hot tubs, but the music itself has a richness of mood that’s sold short by the band’s vacant imagery, which even had a hint of daft charm when Jacuzzi Boys were barely out of their teens. Now in their early-to-mid thirties, the subject matter has them sounding stuck.On “Can’t Fight Forever,” Alcala sings, “I don’t know how I really feel/Sometimes it’s really hard to feel,” over a slinking groove that bassist Danny Gonzales and drummer Diego Monasterios deliver with an impeccable balance of push and reserve. You can close your eyes and picture huge crowds bopping hard to the song, but the resignation that underpins and deflates it is actually alarming. “Sometimes, when I’m not fine,” Alcala continues, “I go looking for a cool time/Waking up is a such a trip/Like the sound of a hard whip.”It’s just that Alcala sounds no more impassioned singing about attraction than he does about antifreeze. When he manages to deliver lines that at least have the potential to intrigue or provoke—“Girls like love and boys like blood” is a phrase Gonzales would repeat to his mother as a child—he and the band squander that potential by making you feel as if their understanding of human behavior derives entirely from 1980s music videos.Jacuzzi Boys started trading-in their traditionalist garage-rock approach for slickness with their second album, 2011’s Glazin. At times, they’ve come close to straight synthpop. But they’ve navigated that change without actually watering down their music—something so many other bands have failed at. Not unlike the Dandy Warhols did over a three-album run from 1997 to 2003, Jacuzzi Boys have already proven they can keep their feet in guitar-driven rock and pop while maintaining their balance, which would suggest ample possibilities for future work.Unfortunately, their sun-zapped slacker outlook drags them back, miscasting themselves as a modern-day answer to hollow, overly attitude-conscious acts like Black Rebel Motorcycle Club. They don’t have to. As a rock band swimming against Miami’s dance and Latin currents, surely they have more interesting stories they can tell us. Their own music deserves it.  Hudson Mohawke does drama better than most. His drums move with the heft of a cruiserweight boxer—powerful but lithe, kicks and snares leaving dents where they land. His rhythms come from trap, but his atmospheres couldn't be further than that genre’s grimy, boarded-up noir: His music positively glistens with chimes and arpeggios, and his monumental horn fanfare suggests armor-plated legions battering down castle doors, or angels raving at the pearly gates.Those contradictions have made him one of the most interesting producers in pop music. His beats stud songs by Kanye, Drake, and Pusha T like luxurious expanses of diamond pavé, brilliant yet still rough to the touch. And working alongside Daniel Lopatin, aka Oneohtrix Point Never, he provided Anohni’s HOPELESSNESS with a harrowing fusion of liturgical gravitas and Hollywood blockbuster. (Despite having been labeled a maximalist, he knows when to get the hell out of the way, and the restraint he brings to Anohni’s album only serves to highlight her own larger-than-life presence.)There’s no lack of drama in his soundtrack to Ded Sec - Watch Dogs 2, which is good: It is, after all, an action-adventure open-world video game about hackers and global corruption, in which spectacular acts of anti-establishment violence play out against the backdrop of San Francisco and the Silicon Valley. HudMo’s music is a natural fit, and he brings his most effective tricks to the table: heart-in-mouth trombone blasts, blindingly bright synthesizer melodies, bruising drums. His customary sound set—a mixture of obviously synthesized brass with simulacral acoustic instruments like harpsichord and piano—complements the uncanny valley of the game world, a painstaking recreation of various Bay Area neighborhoods. If anything, he frequently upends expectations for video-game soundtracks by tilting away from purely electronic textures. Elegiac piano, strings, and choir give the opening “Shanghaied” a feel like John Williams gone trap. Loping Afro-Cuban percussion rounds out the giddily maximalist “Play N Go,” and the symphonic percussion of the regal “Haum Sweet Haum” is faintly reminiscent of Hans Zimmer’s score for Inception.Ded Sec probably shouldn’t be considered a proper follow-up to last year’s Lantern, but it actually holds up favorably in that regard. With a mixture of full-length tracks and minute-long sketches, it’s nicely varied. The short, shimmering ambient study “W4tched (Cinema)” suggests that the producer may have picked up a trick or two from Oneohtrix Point Never during their time together working on Anohni’s album, and OPN’s influence also hangs over the gorgeous, light-speed “Cyber Driver,” with its R2D2 chirps and space-elevator arps. “Amethyst” pairs dial-tone synths and horror-movie organs with scissor-handed snare-and-hi-hat acrobatics in a way that makes even the most hackneyed trap tropes feel vibrant—no easy task. And on the short, kinetic “Balance,” he continually keeps you guessing as to where the downbeat will land; his tricky programming, playing triplets off constantly shifting syncopations, reveals him as one of the most rhythmically interesting producers out there right now.In fact, despite the omnipresence of his customary blare, what might be most interesting here are the nuances that he brings to the table. In “Eye for an Eye (Reprise),” a quiet sketch for FM synths, he strips away the drums to let us see just how dexterous his timbral touch is, every note a jewel-toned liquid explosion. Before “Watch Dogs Theme” builds to its expected climax, with buzzing chords firing like illuminated jets of water, he rolls out a curious, elliptical drum pattern that seems to be pulling itself apart at the seams. Like many of the most interesting moments on Ded Sec, the real action is happening just beneath the surface of all those shiny things. It’s enough to make you wonder what a shadowier, more minimalist Hudson Mohawke might sound like. We’ve basked in the glow of his rockets’ red glare; what would it be like to taste their acrid soot?Since July alone the former Das Racist member Kool A.D. has released more music than some artists do during their entire careers; September’s Peyote Karaoke was not Kool’s first but second 100-track project of the year (and including last year’s O.K., his third in less than 365 days). The common thread between these releases has been a sense of musical restlessness, and most of acted as folios for his omnivorous appetite. Have a Nice Dream, his eighth project of 2016, continues this trend of zooming in on one particular sound—or, in this case, less a formal style than a general and overarching mood.A reflective and meditative release, Have a Nice Dream luxuriates in an off-kilter wooziness. Opener “Who Am I?”—the lone contribution from Bay Area beatmaker Trackademicks, who handled all of the production on August’s ode to hyphy Official—features dramatic strings, over which Kool A.D. guides himself through an existential crisis. Part ontological investigation and part braggadocio session, it’s vintage Kool A.D.: “Just like the leg on a centipede, everything’s everything/Look at my wings so feathery, look at my energy.” Kool’s vocals are slathered in layers of effects, creating the sensation of a hundred internal voices battling for prominence. Even so, it’s the most straightforward track on the EP.“Who Am I?” also holds the distinction of being the only song where the primary draw is Kool A.D.’s rapping. “Just Like Magic” is a breezy electro-pop trifle as viewed through a funhouse mirror: a little goofy, its proportions exaggerated to near-comical level, and pleasantly disorienting. But its lack of structure gives it an amorphous first-draft quality that’s hard to shake. Kool A.D.’s collaboration with Francis and the Lights, the unhurried “It’s Alright 2 Cry,” boasts the most shape of anything on Have a Nice Dream, and it works because Kool manages to inject some irreverence into the self-seriousness that sometimes plagues solo Francis and the Lights material.Kool A.D. is, after all, the kind of dude who opens a song titled “America Is Dead” by melodically singing “Swag swag/Bieber.” It’s this sort of no-fucks-given approach that lets him conclude the project with a straight-faced ambient track that stretches out for 32 minutes. Less “My First Ambient Song” than would might expect, the EP’s centerpiece drags on about ten minutes too long, but the title track’s first two-thirds do a good job of conjuring the kind of dread someone like Andy Stott is known for, albeit with a less suffocating (and less polished) lurch. It’s representative of Have a Nice Dream as a whole: expectedly unexpected, surprisingly effective if meandering, and decidedly low-stakes.When Systems/Layers, the fifth album by Louisville stalwarts Rachel’s, dropped in 2003, it seemed they’d broken through. Elevating their compositions from lovely postmodern takes on classical music to a unique strain of orchestral post-rock, Systems/Layers featured a truly synthesized mesh of chamber music and electronics that sounded like little else. Alas, as Rachel’s had always been more project than band, a period of inactivity followed the record while members worked on other things, and then cofounder Jason Noble fell ill to cancer, dying in 2012. As a result, Systems/Layers remains their final statement, whether or not they’d intended it as such.In the thirteen years that have passed since that record came out, the little nook of a genre which Rachel’s helped birth—classical sounds with indie sensibilities, film-music moodiness and digital experimentation—has grown into a more easily identifiable vein of music couched under the umbrella term “post-classical” (a term that used to refer to minimalists like Steve Reich and Philip Glass, who modern audiences might likely just see as “20th-century classical”). Promoted by labels like 130701 and Erased Tapes and typified by the commercially successful and recognized soundtrack work of Jóhann Jóhannsson, Max Richter, and Ólafur Arnalds, as well as up-and-coming artists like Resina or Emilie Levienaise-Farrouch, post-classical is now a small but thriving world. And Systems/Layers’ status as a godfather record to the nascent genre is undeniable.Now the band and their label Quarterstick have finally seen fit to capitalize on these recent trends by issuing the beloved Systems/Layers for the first time on vinyl, their only record not to have had such a release. Though it isn’t common for thirteen-year-old records by small bands to be reissued without a label change, the CD-only Systems/Layers had entered a kind of a quasi out-of-print status as listeners move to a vinyl-and-streaming binary. Thankfully, the small label Quarterstick has leapt in to rectify the situation.It’s also a fitting tribute to the departed Noble, whose sensibility rings out of Systems/Layers. Each of the five Rachel’s records has a unique voice, guided mostly by which members of the collective had greater hands in the songwriting. Handwriting and Sea and Bells were cowritten by all three core principals—Rachel Grimes, Jason Noble and Christian Frederickson—while Egon Schiele was entirely written by Grimes and Noble’s role was reduced to production. Systems/Layers, with its postmodern merger of music and technology, sounds closer to Noble’s later solo work as Per Mission than anything else in Rachel’s catalog.Fans who haven’t listened to Systems/Layers in years may be pleased to learn that like all Rachel’s records, it doesn’t sound like it’s aged a day and could just as easily be taken as a new release from 130701. Part of this is due to the engineering and mixing talents of Shellac’s Bob Weston, who guides the band toward a sound that is naturalistic and in-the-hall. On tracks like “Esperanza” or “Packet Switching,” the violins swell and soar so high it feels as if you're looking up at the ceiling from the orchestra level of a concert hall.Which, to be fair, may have actually been where the sounds were recorded, as much of the album was recorded live with the SITI Company dance troupe in places like Skidmore College and Indiana University Southeast for a performance piece sharing the same name. The exact nature of the compositional relationship with SITI is unclear, but all of Systems/Layers has a blended, ephemeral feel that feels more like a 60-minute sound experiment than the collection of discrete compositions that made up previous records. Many of the cuts—even the more traditional Satie-esque solo piano of “Anytime Soon” or the darting “Arterial”—end or begin with crossfading segues from adjacent tracks. And many of them depart standard structures entirely, such as “where_have_all_my_files_gone?,” which would sound completely at home on Jóhannsson’s latest Orphee, threading an encircling wall of strings into a throbbing synth burble before transitioning into “Reflective Surfaces,” which blends gamelan and voice samples into a cacophonous churn. And on “Last Things Last” the band finally incorporates actual singing (with a guest appearance from Shannon Wright) in a track that in context feels like an intriguing change of pace despite its relative slightness as a stand-alone track.Best of all are “Water from the Same Source” and “Air Conditioning.” The former offers a stately six-minute representation of Rachel’s formula: gently circulating strings, piano, bass and rock(ish) drumming. It has been featured already in such films as Hancock and La Grande Bellezza and it’s easy to imagine it finding a permanent life soundtracking moments of contemplative emotional transition in film. “Air Conditioning” follows a similar script but is even more condensed: three minutes of nagging, heart-tugging strings via a repeated droning viola riff and soaring violin and cello, before melting away into a hazy fog of samples and found sounds. One thing that distinguishes Systems/Layers from its modern peers is its unpretentious woolliness, which stands in stark contrast to the grandeur-seeking impulses of Jóhannsson and Richter. There’s a charming innocence and gentle defiance that imbues their music with a modest magic, one that also makes it more comprehensible why the band has remained on the margins. The reissue wraps by including the band’s final release from 2005, the eighteen-minute outtake collage “Technology Is Killing Music,” which is slotted neatly as the whole of Side 4. Made up entirely of bits of song and sound from the recording of Systems/Layers, it serves as a nice companion to that record and a perfect endpoint for the band, framing a true blueprint for late 2000s and 2010s post-classical. Additionally, the decision to add it rather than stretch out a sixty-minute record onto four LP sides is a generous and welcome choice, allowing listeners to avoid the subtly annoying problem of “2XLP vinyl reissues” requiring an overabundance of record flipping.It’s uncertain if Rachel’s will ever receive the broad recognition they deserve as forebearers of a vibrant and essential new genre of 21st century music, but it may be that Noble, their easy-going and dearly departed leader, may not have cared either way. For a group who knowingly produced expensive, hand-crafted vinyl packaging for records they knew only a small group of people would buy, sharing their music was always a labor of care and love and provided a kind of satisfaction in and of itself. At least now, it’s all out there.It’s hard to calculate just how pervasive Helmet founder Page Hamilton’s influence has been, but at one point during the mid-90’s it seemed as if his footprints were all over the heavy metal and alt-rock landscape. You could make a strong case that there are traces of Hamilton’s style in the music of Tool, the Deftones, and even the likes of Weezer and the Smashing Pumpkins. Helmet’s reach makes sense given that the band's career arc traversed multiple scenes in a short time. Starting out with one foot in New York’s avant-garde sphere following Hamilton’s tenures with Glenn Branca and Band of Susans, Helmet’s earliest releases on the iconic indie label Amphetamine Reptile in ’89-’90 landed them in the middle of a burgeoning underground wave that included other cult acts like Cows, Killdozer, Today Is the Day, and others. Along the way, Helmet also became associated with the artier side of New York’s hardcore and post-hardcore circles alongside Quicksand and Orange 9mm. Metal audiences—and bands like Sepultura and Pantera —embraced them as well. By 1994, Helmet found themselves in the thick of the alternative rock zeitgeist as their video for “Milktoast,” their contribution to The Crow soundtrack, scored heavy rotation on MTV. And just prior to the band’s breakup in the late ’90s, Helmet toured with Korn and Limp Bizkit. Hamilton’s hypnotic, earworm-like riffs have a way of instantly getting under your skin and sticking to your brain like gum. So does the grooving but strangely counter-intuitive approach to rhythm that sets the band's sound apart to this day. So it’s easy to see why Helmet's signature style rubbed off so readily on other bands. In fact, it's hard to imagine Meshuggah or the Dillinger Escape Plan evolving the way they did without Hamilton’s proto math-metal vocabulary to build on. But in spite of his master’s degree in jazz composition, Hamilton imposed a rigid, primitivistic structural frame on Helmet’s music that he's never completely broken free of. Most of the time, he hasn't really tried. Not unlike Guided By Voices mastermind Bob Pollard, Hamilton has more or less recycled the same formula for Helmet’s entire career, insisting on defining the band by its limits even long after it was creatively expedient to do so—shocking when you consider that, in his time away from Helmet, Hamilton played with Bowie and Joe Henry, nearly joined Wire, and worked on film scores with composer Elliot Goldenthal. The good news is that Hamilton takes more chances than he ever has on Dead to the World, the band's eighth studio album and fourth since Hamilton re-launched the Helmet brand with a revolving cast of side musicians. Things start out promisingly enough when, on album opener “Life or Death,” Hamilton manages to find the elusive middle ground between the tinny grain of the band’s early (and recent) non-album singles and the lush, pumped-up-for-airplay tone of the first Helmet 2.0 album, 2004’s Size Matters. Hamilton also explores melody more fearlessly than ever. On “Bad News,” he nods at Revolver-era Beatles. And the title track might be the most layered and spacious of anything Hamilton's ever released under the Helmet name, with its somber cello occupying a prominent place in the mix. Strings play a key role on the eerie “Expect the World” as well. Meanwhile, “Look Alive,” with its haunting vocal line, is arguably the first time that a Helmet tune has conveyed genuine pathos. And when Hamilton slows down and reprises "Life or Death" at the end of the album, you can make out the harmonic fabric of his chords more clearly than ever before. But the Elvis Costello cover “Green Shirt,” his attempt at spry pop, lands too close to the ill-conceived hard rock bubblegum of Lita Ford’s “Kiss Me Deadly” to make sense as a Helmet tune. Going all the way back to 1994’s Betty—Helmet's only other album with genuine variation —Hamilton proved that he was actually capable of introducing melody into the band's vocabulary without dulling its edge. Hamilton may have started out as a barking vocalist, but he developed into a tunesmith at a time when he was still coming up with vital, intricate riffs. Both Betty and 1997’s Aftertaste contain examples of Hamilton ingeniously weaving vocals and riffs together, expanding while also staying true to Helmet’s core sound.Try, for example, to sing a song like “It's Easy to Get Bored” while playing (or even air-guitaring) the rhythm guitar part without tripping up. In such cases, Hamilton’s experimental instincts and songwriting acumen came together seamlessly. That doesn't happen nearly enough on Dead to the World, where too much of the material stumbles in a confused attempt to marry Hamilton’s increasingly generic pop sensibilities with the savagery of classic-era Helmet. The two elements don’t gel, and both sound forced.Longtime fans will recognize touches of that old Helmet magic in songs like “Red Scare” and “Die Alone,” with its spiraling riff and 3-on-4 rhythm that's long been one of the band's most recognizable hallmarks. But Hamilton has undeniably lost some of the touch that captivated his audience the first time around. Up ‘til the band's breakup in ’98, Hamilton's elliptical lyrics were marked by an intellectual distance that created a rich space between the words and the music—and, crucially, separated Helmet from the glut of their angst- and rage-driven peers.Since 2004, Hamilton has written more openly about relationships, which might have added texture to the music if his lyrics weren't so painfully one-sided and mean-spirited. Not to mention that he continues to attack New Age ideals, as he did all the way back on the early non-LP track “Shirley MacLaine.” To still be harping on the same topic almost 30 years later points to an alarming lack of growth and self-awareness. At least back then, the quirks in Hamilton's lyrics gave them character.Now, when he growls embarrassing lines like “Shut the fuck up! Shut the fuck up!” at the end of “I <3 My Guru,” Hamilton just comes off like an aging, bitter misanthrope with no substance to offer in place of vacuity that still bothers him so much. (Try moving out of L.A., maybe?) Lyrics aside, the elephant in the room on any latter-day Helmet release is the absence of founding drummer John Stanier. Before Stanier re-invented himself as an agile, polyrhythm-juggling finesse player in Battles, he was basically a one-trick pony whose ultra-tight snare crack became as integral to Helmet's sound as Hamilton's riffs.Stanier's brute simplicity provided the yin to Hamilton's yang, and the band hasn't really been the same since his departure. It's encouraging to see Hamilton reaching for new modes of expression on Dead to the World. Ultimately, though, after making such an indelible and unique contribution to the language of modern heavy rock, Hamilton continues to show that he's hemmed-in by the style he invented.Alicia Keys is a creature of habit when it comes to her music. With “Piano and I,” the first track on her hugely successful debut album Songs in A Minor, she started the tradition of opening her albums with a clearly marked intro. Although the format varied—wordless classical compositions, piano-backed spoken-word pieces, a short poem—these intros generally served two purposes: reminding us of her piano chops and elucidating her state of mind during the recording process. If you study a person’s habits enough, a picture of who they are should start to emerge. Yet HERE, Keys’ sixth studio album, does little to further our understanding of who Keys is.“The Beginning (Interlude),” HERE’s opener, sets the scene for the album to work as a series of extended metaphors. So when Keys says “I’m the musical to the project fables/I’m the words scratched out on the record label/I’m the wind when the record spins/I’m the dramatic static before the song begins,” you don’t need to take it literally. Instead, by personifying hip-hop, she is performing the first of several shifts in narrative perspective.It helps to take this into consideration early on, so that it’s not entirely confusing when Keys starts singing from the perspective of a 29-year-old addict on “Illusion of Bliss.” Or on “Kill Your Mama,” where she takes on the role of spokesperson for all of Mother Earth’s wayward children, piling the platitudes onto a simple guitar melody: “Is there any savin’ us/We’ve become so dangerous/Is there any change in us/Even for the sake of love.” Still, this is an Alicia Keys record, and it wouldn’t be wrong to expect her to devote time to herself. There are only three tracks on which you could safely guess that she is giving any insight into her world. “Work on It” is a look just beneath the surface at a relationship that takes, well, work— but the intrigue is lacking, even with production from the usually unflappable Pharrell Williams. “Girl Can’t Be Herself” is surely the anthem for her makeup-free movement and, by her own admission, a tool for working through some of the insecurities that she tackles in the lyrics. “Blended Family (What You Do For Love)” rolls along as an earnest-but-slightly-awkward song about the dynamic within her home, before getting completely sabotaged by a throwaway verse from guest A$AP Rocky.HERE is punctuated with interludes that feature recordings of candid discussions between Keys and her friends including, reportedly, Nas. It seems unjust that these brief appearances spark more curiosity about the speakers than the songs that refer directly to the artist with top billing, and the rest of the tracks do little to address this balance—at least from a lyrical standpoint.To her credit, she flexes some surprising dexterity, moving easily between ballads and more uptempo beats and varying her delivery to occasionally take on a rapper’s cadence, for example on “The Gospel.” She’s probably not about to rebrand herself as a spitter, but the piano melody textured by a stuttering drum pattern works well. The drum programming comes courtesy of Harold Lilly, while songwriting and production duties fell largely to Mark Batson and Swizz Beatz, who left no traces of his signature sound. Along with Keys the four form a production group called The ILLuminaries, and they prove on several occasions how the hivemind approach to beatmaking can pay off.The rhythms on HERE represent a departure from her previous efforts and indicate a willingness to experiment with her sound but the lyrics, which rarely betray a sense of adventure, cancel out most of this good work. While it might not mean much in the age of streaming, there is something particularly confounding about the decision to relegate the most exciting lead single (“In Common”) to a bonus track on the deluxe edition, when the rest of the album didn’t quite follow through on the song’s promise. Alicia Keys has worked hard to build up enough name recognition; she can tick off multiple successes after several years in the game; she has earned the right to throw caution to the wind. It’s hard to shake the feeling that this record was a missed opportunity to do so.At first, Topaz Jones sounds like the sort of young, positive-thinking emcee who should pay tithes to Chance the Rapper on an annual basis. But repeated listens to the 23-year-old New York rapper’s Arcade reveal the intricacy and subtleties of Jones—he’s not the earnest pup sniffing around your ankles, but a fully formed personality, an approachable everyman rapper who’s more Oddisee and Open Mike Eagle than Vic Mensa.Jones’ persona is enriched by a deep love of old funk and soul music (his father Curtis played guitar for the influential band Slave), and he frequently uses live instrumentation. “Grass (Survivor’s Guilt)” transitions from light adult-contemporary guitar to thudding boom-bap, mashing together conflicting thoughts in the same way Jones weaves a love song into a thought about romance as a “great distraction from checking the evening news and staying up on what’s happening.”“Tropicana” occupies the same fleet-footed space as other intoxicating, breezy singles from this year, like Joey Purp’s “Girls @” and Amine’s “Caroline.” But Jones manages to weave details and asides in the lyrics that require repeated, close listens (it also proves he’s more than capable of double-time raps and old-school flows). “He killing but you still say, ‘free my bro,’ truth be told he should do his time/but hey that’s another song,” he offers casually, hinting at a larger world than he has time to get to inside a two-and-a-half minute toe-tapper. It’s a reminder of the potency that a flighty, sub-three minute rap song can contain, and the depths rap often plunders through beats that fill floors with joyous dancing bodies.Jones is also an excellent hook writer, transforming the fantasy of the funky “Powerball” with a gospel-hued, reality-crashing bridge of: “What’s going on/nothing but the rent, nothing but the rent, nothing but the rent.” The song's cheeky “what if I won the lottery” concept is fleshed out by his chuckling reminiscence: “I graduated all they gave me was a piece of paper/no ‘good job’/no goodbye/not even ‘see you later.’” The humanity of the moment is telling: How else could you expect to “move up” in life without the aide of the lotto, while dealing with the quotidian reality that education rarely provides a pragmatic leg-up?The piano ballad “Untitled” showcases his soulful voice, framing the song as a declaration to his mother he’s moving out while sneaking a tender autobiography. He calls back to this “hidden track” a few songs later, trading the piano for guitar (again, no drums) and offering a few more personal details: “My prom date just got engaged, I’m happy for you Marissa/that night in June I was probably just too nervous to kiss you,” he sighs, seconds after noting the colors of his childhood home were painted as the house gets put on the market. These moments are affecting because they are the work of an empathetic writer—he gives everyone in his stories autonomy: Jones has searched himself for the story and held onto the moments he thinks matter, not merely assumed he is the story. With Arcade, he makes you a part of the story, too.Gaika Tavares is from the south London neighborhood of Brixton. It is a heterogeneous immigrant neighborhood endemic of the city’s rapid pace of gentrification. Just this year, protests erupted after a cluster of small businesses along the area’s railway hub were presented with sharp rent increases. Gaika returned to Brixton from art school just as the face of the neighborhood began to change. He notes, in an interview with the Fader, that the schizophrenic logic of real estate development would place an artisanal grocery store across the street from a housing project. That image in itself, while increasingly common throughout the globe, still feels like some anachronism playing itself out, as if the future of the neighborhood was flipping off its past.In just the last two years, Gaika’s been busy archiving this experience of local change into defiantly industrial and viscerally uncomfortable music. His self-released mixtape Machine and his sophomore release Security (for Dre Skull’s Mixpak label) were the building blocks for a musical identity that he has called “ghetto futurism.” In each, he’s honed his blood-curdling howl and hypnotic patois into a sophisticated weapon he uses to castigate the milquetoast evil of the Queen’s government. He is not exactly a rapper, hewing closer to a dancehall deejay (in the style of Popcaan or Vybz Kartel), but the riddims he chooses to “toast” to are startlingly hybrid. He simultaneously borrows from the opiated beats of Clams Casino, the futurist dancehall of Rizzla, the industrial sneer of Death Grips, and the digital discomfort of Objekt or Amnesia Scanner, combining them into a slippery and metallic iteration of unique dance music. His latest release, Spaghetto (and his first for Warp) is a protean collection of eight songs that Tavares has described as his reggae lovers rock record. Opening with “Neophyte,” he displays a new liturgical aspect to his sound. There is nearly a minute of humming, ambient static, and clouds of hisses before he enters the scene. It renders the entire vibe of the album far more gothic than any of his previous releases and allows himself to widen the scope of his sound and subject matter. In “Neophyte,” he considers the ways in which the black body has been pathologized by racist theology: “We're insecure in this image of God,” he says, and repeats with desperate urgency a warning about the shared vulnerability that creates: “Don't you know they'll break your body?/Don't you know they'll take your body?” He’s joined by Leila Adu, whose chorus (“Feelin' so raw/Livin' in these times/Oh, raw, so”) gives the track gospel-like feel. In fact, Gaika creates his version of lovers rock by weaving electronic gospel into his dystopian sound. He manipulates his voice in different ways, dropping his howl for a syrupy and sometimes shaky singing voice, and relies on the help of female vocalists. He resides mostly in the background of “The Deal” complementing the singer Alyusha with sharp lines (“It's the deal that we made in blood/And it's written on your skin”). It almost sounds like a knockoff Kelela track, but Gaika's voice is such a weird instrument. It can be goofy and melancholic, almost recalling Lil B. He adds a tinge of goth sad-boy to his production that can soften the acidic dystopian vibe he usually works under, like on “Glad We Found It,” where he relies on a strangely tantric whisper that is overly earnest but lovable. It would almost be more interesting he if sung more songs with his inimitable howl. When he does, like in songs like “3D,” his screed on gentrification and cold city politics feels more forceful and intimate. That said, Spaghetto is a strong EP from an artist who is surely going to release something even more wondrous variable and strange. He might not have the range, but he does sure have an intelligent sense of adventure and experimentation. Perhaps his music works so well because of its hybridity: mixing dancehall into German techno into gospel into stuff that sounds like Yeezus, all so powerfully. As Homi Bhabha theorized in regards to colonization, hybridity in cultural expression was an essential form of subversion on the part of the colonized and the oppressed. Gaika, like say, Elysia Crampton, is able to fuse vernacular forms into the sounds of popular culture in ways that are pleasurably disruptive and undeniably in your face.  Michael Berdan has a brawler’s voice, spittle-flecked and dissolute. Those nagging vocals seized center stage on Perfect World, the blistering 2015 debut LP from Uniform, Berdan’s duo with multi-instrumentalist Ben Greenberg. Theirs was a marriage made in industrial-punk Hades, draping righteous pique over a grind lashed together from guitar groan and staple-gun electronics. Over the course of six songs—capped by churning, spoken-word downer “Learning to Forget”—the NYC-based pair forged a bracing, singular sound as strong as its Bad Religion-esque logo, strong enough to sustain a cult career.With Ghosthouse, Berdan and Greenberg demonstrate a healthy willingness to interrogate and even upend that sound. The duo’s core certainly remains in place: that punishing glower, that pounding thump, those declamations. But as the title track convulses, it is overwhelmed by a smear of effects, a mutation that might have sat in the background on their first album suddenly assuming center stage. Crazed Sabbath cover “Symptom of the Universe” represents Ghosthouse’s most significant departure. Thundering pop-metal riffs cement the song’s melodic backbone, ultimately exploding into the kind of frenzied, epic soloing that fell out of mainstream favor a decade back; effects skitter and sizzle at the margins, while Berdan’s chants are yanked backwards through vocal filters. Rob Zombie and Mastodon may be the last touchstones you expect to encounter on a Uniform record, yet they apply here. This, after all, is what the EP format is truly for: to bravely dip a toe into the unknown, to strain a bit against the boundaries of what listeners have come to expect. Sophomore LP Wake In Fright arrives early next year; we know, now, to anticipate anything and everything.Bret Easton Ellis recently said if he were to rewrite American Psycho for modern times, he’d change the setting from late-’80s New York to today’s Silicon Valley, and his psychotic anti-hero Patrick Bateman would haunt the offices of a startup. In this updated version, Bateman probably spends his weekends cruising through Northern California in his Tesla Roadster for getaways to Napa, and presumably makes regular trips to Burning Man. As he drives his sports car with wanton abandon, the speakers rumbling with bass, I like to imagine he’s listening to the lite-EDM duo the Chainsmokers. On some balmy day somewhere in the Valley, he has perhaps downloaded their latest release, Collage EP, onto his smartphone to enjoy at his leisure. And he is listening to them not only because everyone in the country is (they’ve dominated the Billboard chart this year with three songs in the top 10, each for multiple weeks on end), but because the DJs Drew Taggart and Alex Pall, on a fundamental level, would be his people: bros in the prime of life, and caricatures of society’s most reviled. If charts are the most reliable reflection of who the most powerful artists in the country are, the Chainsmokers are without a doubt kings of the hill. Yet, unlike any of their peers, even in the world of festival-ready EDM, Pall and Taggart have lent their full-throated support to the tech-bro lifestyle and all its connotations. They speak in the garbled lingo of “iterating” and “disrupting” culture. They preview bits and pieces of songs on Snapchat, and use Hype Machine as a market research tool to hone in on an audience. They wonder aloud about the “return-on-investment” and “reach” their relationship with the press warrants. When networking with Calvin Harris, they say they “basically brain-raped him” with their inquiries and curiosity.Yet, they don’t want you to forget they are red-blooded males. As Pall so lovably admits: “Even before success, pussy was number one.” Taggart famously beefed with Lady Gaga and Halsey on Twitter, unleashing a casual flurry of misogyny in his wake (later claiming he was hacked). On their website, a bio provided by them proudly reads the Chainsmokers are “17.34 combined inches” (the measurement of their penises measured from tip to tip). Taggart lists “Entourage”’s manic Ari Gold as an inspiration, but they also want to be seen as “curators,” “creators,” and “nerds.” All of this is to say, they have painted themselves as hilariously repugnant and horribly fascinating all at once. Moral turpitude and coarse language withstanding, they are still massively popular, and they themselves are not on trial—the music they make is. With Collage, they paint a photorealist portrait of their manspread over the charts. Collage conveniently collects the group’s biggest from the year, and each of these songs works on a finely tuned algorithm. The recipe for a Chainsmokers song is basically two parts airy hook, one part lilting female vocal, and a few dashes of saccharine melancholy and sugary synths. Aesthetically they are close cousins to Calvin Harris’ poptronica and Kygo’s soporific trop-house, but their song structure borrows from forebears like Deadmau5 and Avicii. They’ll still use drops, but they have softened the edge of that serotonin spike by highlighting choruses and melody in pastel color. It makes their music instantly familiar and malleable, and thus radio-friendly. Take “Closer,” for example, their biggest song and a duet between Drew Taggart and the alt-pop singer Halsey. The song derives its power from a sleek and simple chord progression that mirrors the song’s chorus (“We ain’t never getting older”), and borrows heavily from the Fray’s mid-2000s soft-banger “Over My Head.” The chord progression reinforces the chorus, as if it were humming behind Taggart in unison. The song’s narrative is relatable and anthemic but intimate-sounding: A man meets an ex at a party, hooks up, but then remembers why he hated her in the first place. The millennial populism of the lyrics (“Stay and play that Blink-182 song/That we beat to death in Tucson, okay”) make the track feel manically personal. Add in a little bit of sneering class resentment and conspicuous consumption (“So, baby, pull me closer/In the backseat of your Rover/That I know you can’t afford”) and you’ve got a giant hit on your hands. It’s undeniable—powerfully catchy and easy to whistle, with a light veneer of sad-boy sweetness covering EDM’s biting aggression.Elsewhere they are more faceless, feeding off of the energy that a series of female vocalists gives to their tracks. Alex Pall has said that his main function in the group is as A&R, booking guests for individual songs and tailoring each one to fit a different demographic. With Daya, they crudely masquerade as the xx in “Don’t Let Me Down,” and (in their parlance) put forward “LMFAO with better clothes” in “Inside Out” (featuring Charlee). In each case, they find a different route to the reptilian brain, stripping back the McMansion architecture of an EDM song and redecorating with items procured from Anthropologie.Perhaps, what is most interesting about the Chainsmokers is the cynicism of their approach. Their music is essentially an accretion of trends, a packet of market research. EDM’s boom-and-bust cycle has come to an end, and they’ve weathered the drought, presenting themselves as part of a lovably hateable lifestyle brand that grips the nation’s young and powerful. One thing about cynics is they tend to survive, and Chainsmokers seem engineered above all for survival.Tyvek have been going for over a decade, and at different points throughout the Detroit punks’ tenure, at least 22 people have counted among their ranks. Kevin Boyer’s voice, guitar, collaged cover artwork, and lyrics have always been at the band’s center, but he’s quick to point out the obvious—that each contributing member brings something unique to the table. “Tyvek is always changing,” Boyer told Maximum Rocknroll. “There’s always a period of relearning, half-retracing our steps, but we always find ourselves in a different place from where we left off.” They change their approach semi-regularly, but they don’t sound like a brand-new band with every release.The band’s sound is fairly well-defined. It’s loud punk music, guided by Boyer’s shouted abstract poems. Sometimes the songs are faster, sometimes they’re more anthemic, sometimes they’re choppy, and sometimes they’re all over the place. It really depends on who’s playing. Beyond the more visible albums and singles released by bigger indie labels, they’ve put out piles of CDRs and tapes. Then there’s the sprawl of music released by the members’ other bands. Mountains and Rainbows and the Intended, for example, both had strong debut albums arrive this year. Members of Protomartyr and Saturday Looks Good to Me have played in Tyvek. The list goes on like that for a while. Tyvek’s new album Origin of What is an acknowledgement of the band’s history; it features seven musicians from across the band’s lineups. Every new song shuffles the players, and other than Boyer, the only constant is Fred Thomas, who recorded the album and drums on 10 of the 12 tracks. Thomas and Boyer go way back: Thomas recorded a 2002 Boyer solo project, and more recently, worked on Tyvek’s On Triple Beams. These two anchors become important when Origin of What weaves between slower, paced material and all-out bashers. The opening two tracks “Tip to Tail” and “Can’t Exist” fall at the rowdier end of the spectrum, showing Tyvek at the height of their kinetic earworm powers. It’s also a one-two that shows a huge range in guitar tone—bleary echoing guitars linger in the background of the former while the latter is all crunch and distortion.The faster, punchier stuff is counterbalanced by songs like “Origin of What”—a six-minute track with a more gradual, dense tread that addresses U.S. Steel and the decline of the Euro. Boyer has talked about the importance of the “subtle tics” in Tyvek songs, which is true—details and texture are always key to the character of their records. There's a moment on “Choose Once” when a once-prominent vocal is suddenly swallowed beneath the song’s huge primary guitar line, as if Boyer’s mic was kicked over. Then there’s “Tyvek Chant,” a song comprised of repeated screams and guitars that seem to come through an AM radio feed, abstracted by crackles and fuzz. Several pieces on Origin of What show that the Tyvek operation is generally more subtle than their shout-along, high-speed rock‘n’roll masterworks might suggest. “Underwater Three Dub” is the most gentle point of the record—a collaboration between Boyer, Thomas, and Shelley Salant (who makes spacey, hypnotic instrumental guitar records under the name Shells). While this melody floats and shimmers, Boyer sings a mantra of sorts: “No limits. Smash limits.” Aided by the instincts of his collaborators, Boyer threads together these wordy, detail-stuffed songs that are fast and staid, intense and gentle, paranoid and curious. Punk can be uniform and boring. By spreading out and proving adept at several modes, Tyvek show that this music can be plenty inclusive—that there are no limits.While their recorded output was inversely proportional, the earthly fates for father and son Tim and Jeff Buckley were eerily similar. Whereas Tim released nine studio albums in his lifetime before a heroin overdose at the age of 28, his son Jeff released but one studio LP before drowning in the Mississippi River at the age of 30. And after their too young deaths, their posthumous fates have also been parallel, with a plethora of live recordings and outtakes swelling both Buckleys’ legacies. Since he had less material to draw upon, Jeff's discography and cult have sadly become the definition of barrel-scraping: a 2CD set of demos, a deluxe edition of Grace, three live albums, a live DVD, another album of soundboard tapes and demos, not to mention this year’s cash-in of covers. Jeff’s aura is lit by his unfulfilled potential, while Tim’s is shaped by the cautionary arc of an artist: from young fledgling to fully-realized artist to a man broken by the end of his life.Father Tim’s legacy continues to fly under-the-radar, in part because he recorded and released records at a clip, toured constantly, and never amassed a big fanbase. From his baroque-pop self-titled debut in 1966 through his astonishing avant-garde primal scream Starsailor in 1970 to the B&D r&b of Greetings From L.A., Buckley evolved and molted so quickly that even the most dedicated fan wouldn’t have been able to keep up. Even though a release like Lady, Give Me Your Key unearths never-before-heard material, it still doesn’t reveal anything new about the mercurial man.Part of what makes Key a lukewarm listen is its relation to one of Buckley’s heavy-handed early albums, 1967’s Goodbye and Hello, right before he matured with his expert fusion of folk and improvised jazz on 1969’s spellbinding Happy Sad. While the excellent 1999 set Works in Progress found him making leaps and bounds towards his breakthrough with every take, Key finds him still on the other side of that discovery, near the cul-de-sac of an exclusively “folk” artist. Bob Dylan was pushing at every boundary of the genre with each new album, but Buckley’s own breakthrough was still a year off.The unreleased title track is a sly play on the dual meanings of “key,” though it might be a red flag to begin a romantic relationship with anyone stashing a kilo of a controlled substance in their home. The demos of “Knight-Errant” and “Carnival Song” will land on modern ears like Ren Faire throwbacks, the heavy crackle of the acetate making them more of historical interest than listening pleasure. “Sixface,” another one of five unreleased songs included here, features the kind of lyrics that drastically age this particular era of Buckley’s songs with gobbledygook lines like, “Your seven seas and contraband on bluebird sun.” That said, you can hear how he trashed the rest of that quickly-strummed song, kept the opening plea of “Come here woman,” and later recast it as the central howl on Starsailor’s kinked and manic opening assault just a few years on.Some of Goodbye and Hello’s better moments are presented here in stripped-down acoustic versions, peeling away some of their studio trappings. “Once I Was” gets pared back and slowed to a crawl, the lonesome prairie harmonica line that hounded the released version nowhere to be found. The powerful “Pleasant Street” retains its power even in this crackly version, before Buckley decided to soar into a higher key at the chorus. The driving congas are missing on “I Never Asked to Be Your Mountain,” leaving just Buckley’s furious 12-string guitar and voice. It’s a striking early song, even if it reads now as a haphazard defense of being a deadbeat dad to his son: “The Flying Pisces sails for time/And tells me of my child/Wrapped in bitter tales and heartache/He begs for just a smile/O he never asked to be her mountain.”When there was a concert paying tribute to his father in 1991, “Mountain” was the song that Jeff Buckley decided to tackle and make his own. For a man who was all but abandoned by his father during his lifetime, there’s a latent rage and rightful sense of indignation when Jeff recasts his father’s voice as his own. It’s a bittersweet irony that in taking on his father’s song, it became his own coming out party, establishing Jeff as an iconic new voice and setting him on a path that would tragically echo that of his father. But while Jeff didn’t live long enough to scale those same heights, just beyond the scope of Key, we can hear just how high Tim climbed. Mary Halvorson has been hailed for her technique ever since the debut of her trio. Recorded with bassist John Hébert and Xiu Xiu drummer Ches Smith, the guitarist’s first album as a bandleader referenced the power of noise-rock and the manic leaps of melody prized by her onetime teacher Anthony Braxton. Nearly a decade after that big splash, Halvorson still shreds with distinction, and that’s just one widely admired aspect of her art.With each subsequent recording on the Firehouse 12 label, she has kept a recognizable language intact while refusing to repeat herself. First, she turned her core trio into a quintet, adding alto sax and trumpet. Then she built the band into a septet, incorporating trombone and tenor sax. As her lineups have increased in size, Halvorson’s sophistication as a composer has come into focus. After a solo-guitar covers project in 2015, she’s back to enlarging her compositional palette—this time with an octet that adds pedal steel guitarist Susan Alcorn to the roster.This isn’t one of the instruments you’d typically expect to hear in a jazz group of any size, but its expressive range makes it a perfect fit for Halvorson’s quick-change compositional style. Alcorn’s pedal steel can suggest the warmth of country-western aesthetics, and also the droning sustain of ambient moods, often within the same tune. Opening track “Spirit Splitter (no. 54)” opens with a swaying line for the pedal steel on the surface. But underneath, the song teems with melodic activity. Ingrid Laubrock’s tenor saxophone navigates a tricky, ascending phrase, while other brass and reed players hit strutting, staccato passages. Amid the manic quality of the writing, there is still a relaxed vibe thanks to the players’ collective subtlety. The well-blended sound of this group can also be heard during the song’s spotlight features, as when trombonist Jacob Garchick improvises behind alto saxophonist Jon Irabagon’s incendiary solo.On Away With You, performances veer from tightly scripted to more free-sounding sections, before heading back toward established themes. But these transitions rarely feel jagged. The title track begins with arpeggios from Halvorson’s guitar that gradually fade into the background once harmony lines for the other instruments take over. After a development section, Alcorn’s guitar emerges, referencing Halvorson’s original part. Then the two guitarists break the theme down again, collaborating on some intense, minimalist riffing. Though Halvorson’s flintier attack is usually distinguished from Alcorn’s more rounded tone, here that’s not always the case. On “The Absolute Almost (no. 52),” Halvorson picks up a slide, occasionally emulating the sound of her pedal steel counterpart. Elsewhere, Alcorn uses an extended solo on “Fog Bank (no. 56)” to evoke experimental strumming effects that will sound familiar to Halvorson’s fans. The composer-bandleader doesn’t take as many solos this time around—she prefers to linger inside the sound of her octet. But when Halvorson does cut loose, as on “Safety Orange (no. 59),” she’s as inventive as ever.Trumpeter Jonathon Finlayson sneaks up on the listener, moving from a mellow to a regal sound in the course of a few bars. And Ches Smith’s drumming is similarly adaptable—offering straight-ahead swing rhythms as well avant-garde marches and clattering explosions. There aren’t many fast tempos to be found on Away With You, though the album still has a live-wire feel, thanks to the density of the writing and the crispness of all those performances. The result is one of Halvorson’s most entrancing sets yet—and the first one in which ensemble interplay seems even more important than the various soloists’ individual fireworks.Having watched the shelf life for buzz bands grow ever shorter during the late ’00s, Sleigh Bells seemed to understand the need to make the most of their moment. In the wake of their breakthrough debut Treats they worked fast, firing off a couple more LPs within a year of each other, as if trying to refuse the world the chance to forget about them. Though it suffered the inevitable diminishing returns expected from a band that got everything right the first time around, 2012’s Reign of Terror nearly matched the blunt force of their debut, while distinguishing itself just enough with its arena-rock lean. But by their third effort 2013’s Bitter Rivals, the sugar rush had become a headache. The album was genuinely obnoxious in a way its predecessors had only pretended to be, and almost as troubling for a band whose power stemmed from their laser focus—their resolve to drive a single idea, brick on the gas pedal, head first through any obstacle in its path—it was strangely noncommittal.   For their fourth album, Sleigh Bells did something inherently risky for a band so of-the-moment: They took their time, piecing together Jessica Rabbit in stops and starts over three years, and it sounds like it. Recorded in part with Mike Elizondo, the seasoned Los Angeles producer best known for glossing up records for Eminem and his Shady/Aftermath cohorts, it’s a hodgepodge of clashing sounds and concepts that’s united only by its indiscriminate maximalism. Anybody holding out hope for another great, singular inspiration to strike the band again the way it did on their distortion-addled debut probably won’t find it even worth a cursory stream. What the album lacks in vision, though, it attempts to compensate for through sheer exertion. If nothing else, the duo has never seemed to be trying harder than they are here, so although Jessica Rabbit is even more scattershot than Bitter Rivals was, it at least has a sense of showmanship that album didn’t.  The album also smartly runs with the one thing that Bitter Rivals did right: giving more control to singer Alexis Krauss. Krauss had always been the face of Sleigh Bells, their head cheerleader and fun ambassador. Her past as a member of a teen-pop band was central to the group’s mythos, their link to the very music they were subverting. But as integral as she was to the band’s image, Treats didn’t give her all that much to do. Derek Miller’s compressed guitars were so loud, so blown out, that often all Krauss could do was play against them, injecting her airy voice here and there, and even then mostly to make the guitars feel that much heavier in comparison.   On subsequent efforts, Krauss has dialed up the ferocity to the point where she’s no longer juxtaposed against the fray—she is the fray. And as she takes on increased songwriting responsibilities on Jessica Rabbit, she’s also seized the chance to show off her full vocal range. On “Rule Number One,” her voice climbs from a Kesha sneer to a robust Xtina wail as she belts “POP ROCKS AND COKE MAKE YOUR HEAD EXPLODE!” over Miller’s hair-metal riffage. Somehow, she’s even louder than the guitars.  While Krauss relishes the opportunity to play the pop star she never got an actual chance to be, Miller succumbs to a reduced role. His spliced guitars propel “Crucible,” an admirably spirited mashup of circa-’87 Whitney Houston and Licensed to Ill-era Beastie Boys, but it’s hard to even guess what hand he might have had on the Elizondo co-production “I Can Only Stare,” a guitar-free, high-drama pop number closer to something you’d find on a Leona Lewis record than anything on Treats. Similarly, the brooding, EDM-tinged “Unlimited Dark Paths,” as with far too many Elizondo productions, sounds like it was somehow conceived with Skylar Grey in mind.   Even when Jessica Rabbit treads into generic territory, Krauss manages to leave a personal stamp on the material. “I was dreaming of a dead end street that we used to run down,” she sings on “Lightning Turns Sawdust Gold,” over a slinky, lighter-waving groove more than a little inspired by Santigold’s “Disparate Youth.” Elsewhere she calls out a partner who wastes a Friday night getting high and watching The Lion King, the kind of specific, seemingly autobiographic detail that rarely made its way into the first couple Sleigh Bells records. She takes ownership of these songs in a way she never did before.  So Jessica Rabbit is Krauss’s show, and she’s a show worth watching. The problem is it’s just not very catchy. On their first two albums, Sleigh Bells always had a granite hook to balance out the volume. But too many of these songs are just bluster in search of a purpose. Casualties of the duo’s noncommittal approach, they fall into a thankless gray area, too tinkered-over to function as punk, yet too haphazard to be great pop.Eventually every rapper hits the point where they stop keeping up with the trends, either because they’ve lost interest in them or they’ve been left behind by them. It’s hard to tell which is the case for Jeezy. Perhaps he felt burned by the commercial failure of last year’s hitless Church in These Streets, a kinda-sorta attempt to engage with the modernist sounds of new Atlanta, or perhaps his heart was never in it, but on Trap or Die 3 Jeezy stops pretending to give even the slightest damn what listeners under 25 might be into. An album in title but mixtape in spirit, it’s a back-to-basics statement from a rapper who, even at his most commercial, never really strayed all that far from the basics to begin with.  “Let’s take these bitches back to ’05,” Jeezy rapped on “Way Too Gone,” from 2011’s TM 103: Hustlerz Ambition. That was three albums and five years ago, so it’s not like he’s ever been one to put the past behind him. It used to be that all that distinguished a Jeezy album from a mixtape was the potential that from time to time you might hear his authoritative groan over something other than the same default synth presets and trap snares, but with a tracklist dominated by Jeezy’s old-guard producers Shawty Redd and D. Rich, Trap or Die 3 promises from the outset that won’t happen. Amid the barrage of battle-cry adlibs and synthesized clatter, opener “In the Air” ends with a rant about “this watered-down shit I keep hearing on radio,” affirming the old truism that rappers only complain about the radio when they aren’t on it.  So Trap or Die 3 casts Jeezy as a true defender of trap, a music style that isn’t remotely endangered, in his own way every bit as evangelical about the craft as Jurassic 5 used to be about conscious hip-hop. A less charitable read is that he’s just trying to take an easy W after a couple of under-performing projects. That’s not the worst strategy at this stage in Jeezy’s career—by playing it so safe, the project often can’t help but hit its mark. “So What” moves with the ruthless efficiency of a slasher movie score, and “Goldmine” is similarly pared down to just the essentials: taut pianos, a few stray string stabs, and a ruthless snap of a beat. Jeezy seems reinvigorated by the familiar terrain. “Run a Fortune 500 from a pre-paid,” he boasts on the trim Yo Gotti feature “Where It at.” “Like That” nonchalantly lands the album’s most random punchline: “Have a threesome with the money: just me, you and Oprah.” And on the kinetic “Let Em Know,” the old T. Rex moves with velociraptor dexterity, matching a twitchy club tempo with a springy, hooky flow. There’s always a thrill in hearing that colossal voice move with that kind of speed; it's like witnessing somebody dunk an anvil.  Trap or Die 3 offers real reminders of Jeezy’s greatness, then, something Church in These Streets couldn’t claim. But some of these songs just sound terrible. “It Is What It Is” suffocates under a trash heap of gaudy, circa-2006 modulated horn noises, and its drum machines hit with all the tact of firecrackers going off in a tin can. “Recipe” continues Jeezy’s trend of inheriting the dullest beats Mike WiLL Made-It will sign his name to. And though courtship has never been Jeezy’s most fruitful muse, “Sexé” finds him putting even less effort into his come-ons than usual (“Bitch you know you sexy with your sexy ass…girl you know you flexing with your flexing ass.”) That track also features the record’s most flabbergasting inclusion, a partially inaudible verse from Plies that, to judge from its helpless mastering, he apparently recorded into an iPhone 4 from a bathroom stall.   How does something like that even make it onto a major-label album? Def Jam couldn’t have shelled out a few bucks to have a Plies verse re-recorded? It’s clear that in the streaming age labels have begun rubber-stamping releases that they previously would have intervened with, figuring there’s little to lose if the budget’s low enough. That’s good news for rappers who used to struggle just to get an album released. But for all the flak that label A&R teams get, at their best they incentivize innovation, pushing rappers to become something greater than themselves and providing them the resources to make it happen. Jeezy is nearing 40, and the window to promote him not just as a trap star but an actual star is closing. Nobody’s giving him that push anymore.Shirley Collins is so deeply woven into the folk tradition, her own life story could be the dramatic tale of a forgotten threnody. Lodestar is Collins’ first album in 38 years, her first since she regained her ability to sing. Back in the late ’70s, following her divorce with her husband Ashley Hutchings, leader of the Albion Country Band, Collins lost her voice and retired from music. The doctors diagnosed her with dysphonia, but you might put it more fancifully; heartbreak robbed of her powers, just as some capricious faerie might steal away a child.A working-class woman from rural Sussex, Collins learned traditional English songs passed down from her grandmother and aunt and soon fell in with the early folk revival. After meeting the song collector Alan Lomax at a party, she traveled with him across America, collecting music from foundational figures such as Bessie Jones and Mississippi Fred McDowell. The journey was serialized in her book America Across The Water, and some of the recordings found their way into the Coen Brothers’ seismic O Brother, Where Art Thou soundtrack. Today her admirers are legion: from Will Oldham to Billy Bragg to Current 93’s David Tibet, who was instrumental to coaxing Collins back to the stage in 2014. But as the comedian Stewart Lee—another long-time fan—writes in the liner notes, Collins’ music is “egoless,” her voice a conduit for these ancient and timeless songs. Never has this been so obvious as it is on Lodestar.At 81, Collins’ voice has grit and grain, both old and strangely ageless. There is the sense that she has stood still, and folk has revolved around her. Recorded in Collins’ front room in her cottage in Lewes in rural Sussex, Lodestar is comprised of interpretations of English, American, and Cajun songs dating from the 16th Century to the 1950s. She is surrounded by a small coterie of collaborators, chief among them musical director/producer Ian Kearey of Oysterband and Ossian Brown and Stephen Thrower, members of Cyclobe and both formerly of the English post-industrial group Coil. Speaking of Lodestar, Kearey resists easy comparison to Johnny Cash’s latter-day recordings with Rick Rubin, but there are clear parallels. Essentially the trio’s role here is to curate an atmosphere that gestures back to Collins’ storied past, while authentically capturing her in the here and now.There are fiddles, mandolins, and picked guitars, with Brown adding a droning hurdy-gurdy here, and a church pipe organ there. On several songs, there is something Collins simply refers to as “The Instrument”—a unique hybrid of a mountain dulcimer and a five-string banjo, which she commissioned back in the ’60s and played on 1968’s The Power of the True Love Knot. An opening 11-minute piece titled “Awake Awake—The Split Ash Tree—May Carol—Southover” weaves a rich web, tying together apocalyptic balladry, wailing hurdy-gurdy, Pagan carols, and the jingling bells of a Morris dancer. As Lodestar opens up, the theme of death takes hold—although life in these songs is cheap, and people perish in matter-of-fact ways. “Cruel Lincoln” is the tale of a mason conned by a landowner, who returns to seek revenge. In the background, you can hear the birds sing in Collins’ garden, even as the tale of butchery unfolds: “There was blood in the kitchen, there was blood in the hall/There was blood in the parlor where the lady did fall.” On “Death And The Lady,” which Collins first recorded with her sister Dolly in 1970, a wandering woman comes face to face with the Grim Reaper; but the quaver in Collins’ voice lends this version a faltering quality, only intensifying its sense of somber fatalism.If her voice is smaller now than back in the day, Collins is still capable of surprising range. A take on the old Cajun lament “Sur Le Borde De L’eau,” popularized by the Louisiana guitarist Blind Uncle Gaspard, is truly haunting. But a spry mischief runs through the nonsense song “Old Johnny Buckle,” in which the Johnny is given medical advice to rub his wife’s injured leg with gin, but drinks it instead, and is consequently sent to hell. This seam of black humor persists into “The Rich Irish Lady,” a song about a wealthy woman who spurns a doctor’s romantic advances, then falls ill and throws herself at his mercy. Not only does the doctor deny her, he announces that he will dance on her grave, and as the track segues into a manic Kentucky fiddle piece titled “Jeff Sturgeon,” you can imagine Collins kicking up her heels in her front room, cackling her head off.Many of the recordings Collins made in her song-collecting days were of aged singers, transmitting the tales and melodies they themselves learned in their youth. Back then, she was their custodian, but after a lifetime carrying them, she sounds at one with them; they have grown around her, and she has grown around them. That Lodestar exists at all feels like a minor miracle. That it is so exquisitely done is a small blessing on top.For an artist whose bio reads that she was “born in 1784 in the backseat of a sea-foam green space pinto,” LA-based soul singer Kadjha Bonet’s debut LP The Visitor sounds a bit closer to home than that. Her sound is retro-fitted, but you only have to travel to, say, the experimental jazz-meets-soul-meets-singer-songwriter traditions of 1974 to find her home planet. Her voice twists Roberta Flack’s velvet tone around the archness of Shirley Bassey over creamery-rich strings, producing a sound as familiar as it is haunting. “Honeycomb,” is the album’s lead single, and alongside mid-album tracks “Nobody Other” and “Portrait of Tracy” it sets forth the best case for Bonet. Both are couched in a majestic sort of of blaxploitation soul, a mix of half-remembered Bond themes the string section from Curtis Mayfield’s 1972 epic Superfly. Bonet's voice is the twist in the fabric, the element that sends the song down a Lewis Carroll rabbit hole; her falsetto on “Nobody Other” creates a vortex where the Isley Brothers’ and Aaliyah’s version of “At Your Best” meet. It also features a rolling Hammond organ, another classic crate-dust sound.  Bonet employs the intentional oxymoron “fickle majesty” in “Honeycomb’”s lyrics, and the phrase is also an apt description for the album. The Visitor is an amazing virtuoso performance, both for Bonet’s voice and for the many instruments she plays on it. However, the songwriting loops and twirls around styles and concepts that traditionally have straight-line meanings, and it creates a bit of ear fatigue, especially when so much of the album sits in a luxurious mid-tempo. On “Fairweather Friend,” Bonet discovers the limits of a friend’s loyalty and mourns it with a cool, laconic vocal that drains all the sorrow of the song. The trilling harplike ripples behind her are lovely, but the song is a little inert.Bonet can’t be faulted for ambition; the plush arrangements bring to mind Janelle Monáe’s The ArchAndroid in their scope and scale. “Francisco” swirls together late-’60s Beatles psychedelia and “Walk On By” woodwinds into something that might be called “Sgt. Pepper soul.” On the title track she delivers the impressionistic lines “Skin the color copper/She comes without a call” in an overwhelmed rush. Immediately thereafter, “The Visitor” spills into a well-composed orchestral mini-suite and closes with a vocal run that displays the stunning full breadth of her voice. But The Visitor doesn't quite equal the sum total of its impressive pieces. Like a lot of talented artists working underneath their potential, Bonet offers a collection of familiar references, immaculately recreated, without telling us something about herself that we might hold onto. She is a master at her craft, but she hasn’t quite figured out what she wants to say just yet.In a few short years, New Zealander Connan Mockasin has proven himself game for all manner of chameleonic collaboration. With just a few days in Marfa, Texas, he cooked up a little something with Blood Orange’s Dev Hynes, wrote for and served as Charlotte Gainsbourg’s backing band, and apparently played around with Vince Staples and James Blake on a not-released project. But most tantalizing was a long alluded-to collaboration with Sam Dust, formerly of the British dance-punk Late of the Pier. For all of the rapidity of those other connections, Mockasin and Dust first began smushing together their weird Play-Doh pop songs back in 2009. Meaning that well before Mockasin proclaimed Forever Dolphin Love and busted out a FreekiLeaks slow jam and Dust’s band imploded, Soft Hair was slowly growing.Hinted at seven years ago and many mixing delays later, Soft Hair finally appears. And for those tantalized/ perplexed at the thought at Mockasin’s creepy castrato set against the heavier, tweaked beats that Dust made as LA Priest will instead find him hewing much closer to the former’s sound. The soggy pretzel logic of Pod-era Ween informs songs like opener “Relaxed Lizard,” most pointedly with that band’s obsession with early Prince. It’s a good fit for Mockasin’s squeaky voice—which can twirl up to “Camille”-like heights without having to speed up the tape—but also for Dust, who can dip into Prince’s vibrato with conviction. “Lizard” almost passes as a helium-voiced sexy little number, until the come-on of “I’d love to fuck you” has to share space with the admission “when you find she’s seventeen” deflates the balloon completely.The waterlogged skank of “Jealous Lies” is a drunken ditty that replicates the kind of lo-fi weirdness that everyone from Paul McCartney to Aphex Twin has doodled in their home studios. The slow rise and fall of distant ocean waves and flanged-out guitar lines keeps “Lying Has to Stop” from being any kind of conventional beach track. It’s slow bubble could be seductive, except for Connan’s discomfiting come-on “I like to watch you run/But I’ll never touch your bum.” Dust’s dramatic over-emoting on “In Love” sticks out, but it’s the croaked chorus of “in love with the Japanese girls/in love with the Chinese girls” that turns the song irredeemably creepy.Every so often, the album strikes that tricky balance between queasy and cute. “Goood Sign” is strange and charming in equal measure, Arthur Russell mumblecore on downers, set atop a slo-mo ’80s Italo horror synth soundtrack. The drum machine may be set to ‘somnambulant’ on “Alive Without Medicine,” but it makes for a lazy groove that syncs well with Super Mario water world bloops. Dust finds a rubber boot beat midway through, only to have Mockasin’s voice break the spell and have the track resolutely meander off course. “l.i.v.” is a mild, languid closer, but it’s not hard to think that after seven years spent cooking, Soft Hair’s results come out half-baked.The idea of a Jim James solo career was slightly perplexing at first. My Morning Jacket is a band in a true, old-school sense—now with a fixed lineup, any character in which would be hard to replace—but Jim James is the sole songwriter, and it has always been his vision driving them. What, exactly, was he leaving out? Yet as 2013’s Regions of Light and Sound of God suggested and his new record Eternally Even confirms, there are other ways to wield his hardly-of-this-earth voice, other ways to meld genres within his idiosyncratic hybrid of American music—music that wouldn't quite fit in the MMJ framework, but which needs to exist nonetheless.Eternally Even, logically enough, is more of a companion to James’ last solo LP than it is to My Morning Jacket’s stunning 2015 release The Waterfall, particularly in its deeper indulgence of James’ soul influences. But it takes those soul elements and submerges them in psychedelic textures, making for a head trip of an album. Regions was a strong record in its own right but felt less like a statement than a collection of songs—which, with material dating over the course of a few years, it sort of was. But Eternally Even sounds as if it was sequenced as one piece that requires front-to-back listening. James goes all-in on a frayed, psychedelic-soul aesthetic—“True Nature” sounds like an old funk song dropped in an aquarium. Many of the songs are built off of small instrumental passages that weave the album together: The simmering, festering bed of synths, bass and guitar in opener “Hide in Plain Sight” recurs in “We Ain’t Getting Younger Pt. 1,” which in turn pairs with its Pt. 2 to create the monumental core of the record. Eternally Even has also been touted as his most directly political writing of his career—pointedly released just before Election Day. This is another thing that, at first glance, could go almost awry—a topical Jim James record almost sounds like an oxymoron. James is not a literal writer, or at least not at his best when he’s being literal. His lyrics don’t work that way; his voice very much does not work that way. James can be most evocative when you have no clue what the hell he’s talking about. Who knows the meaning behind “Steam Engine,” yet it’s one of the most powerful songs he's ever written; this is the guy who wrote a song literally called “Wordless Chorus” and has penned numerous catharses built on “oh-ah” refrains and guitar freak-outs rather than narrative journeys. But he winds up succeeding, thanks to the haunting quality hanging over much of Eternally Even, reflecting the tensions of 2016. In fact, James only occasionally dips into concrete imagery you could associate with America’s political climate, with other songs only making oblique references. Sure, it’s clear where “Same Old Lie” is coming from, with lines like “If you don’t vote it’s on you not me” and “Is there any peace to be found in a lifetime?” Otherwise, it's one meditative note among many: There’s the rumination on mortality in “We Ain’t Getting Any Younger,”and then the more personal reckoning in “Eternally Even.” The album’s impact is rooted in how, collectively, humanity searches for hope for the future. As the album draws to a close, that seems to be where James wants to lead us. After all the twists and ruptures across the album, we get the floating hymn of “Eternally Even”—a song with James in near-reverie, letting his voice glide over an instrumental that sounds like clouds parting. That’s where the James we always knew comes through: offering his trademark transcendence, that voice cutting through the haze and murk of the album, of this year. And it acts as a salve when we most need it.A$AP Mob’s proper debut album begins with a two-and-a-half-minute skit that takes place in a New York bodega. Pushing lead single “Yamborghini High” over seven minutes, it’s the kind of move that could easily be frustrating. Instead, it’s pretty funny: It’s a group of men trying to out-cozy each other, arguing about who has the most comfortable outfit. A$AP Rocky arrives with tall tales of a ridiculous getup that he boasts was inspired by global warming. It feels natural, which is a welcomed evolution for Rocky, aka That Pretty Motherfucker, who has for the longest time been far more concerned with designer credibility than wearability. The skit is a signal for what’s to come—an infectious sense of camaraderie and a marked return to A$AP’s core sound and strengths.In practice, Cozy Tapes is an A$AP Rocky album, as he appears on all but three songs. (For comparison, Ferg is on only two tracks, and Ant is at second-most with just four features.) Whether intentionally or not, the rest of the Mob readily acknowledge that it’s Rocky’s show. In one skit, they’re convinced to go somewhere only after verifying Rocky won’t join them. In another (there are a lot of skits here), someone’s pursuing a woman, and his greatest attribute is his association with Rocky and the perks that come with it. Taking the record for what it is, Cozy Tapes is Rocky’s most cohesive project since his debut.Beyond being the face of the group, Rocky proves that he remains, by far, the most talented rapper in the Mob—including Ferg. Each track on Cozy Tapes finds him successfully using a new flow: “Crazy Brazy” is an impressive display of agility; “Money Man” is all measured and melodic repetition; and “London Town” is his best, with bars that spill over and build on themselves. It’s the first time since LIVE.LOVE.A$AP where Rocky’s pure rapping ability is the focal point. He’s long been lauded as an expert stylist and curator, but that too often has been a distraction from his skill. Though the highs of LONG.LIVE.A$AP are very high (“Goldie,” “Long Live A$AP,” “1Train”), the entire album is bogged down by an obsession with high-profile collaborators and manufactured swagger, like an oversized Rick Owens outfit. Rocky, for his part, never rapped about much more than material goods, but that aspiration felt important when he was doing so over beats that he could command and felt specific to him—not overpriced ones that would go to the highest bidder. Cozy Tapes has a very modest roster of producers, which allows him to set the tone and vibe. None of these songs would stand out on their own (à la “Wild for the Night”) if not for Rocky and the Mob’s efforts on top of them.No matter how much Rocky excels, Cozy Tapes is still billed as an A$AP Mob album. As such, it is eons beyond Lord$ Never Worry, their debut mixtape, which is nothing more than a bloated victory lap that feels laughable four years later. On Lord$, there was a concerted effort to showcase the lesser known members of the collective, hoping to turn them from secret weapons into superstars. The tape succeeded in shining a light on Ferg, but no one else has popped off as intended.  Instead of trying to showcase individuals, Cozy Tapes has a great cohesion, with Ant, Nast, and Twelvyy playing bit roles. The exception is “Nasty’s World,” a track very much set up to be Nast’s “Method Man.” He’s a capable rapper, but that’s not enough, especially when younger rappers (like Lil Uzi Vert, Lil Yachty, and MadeinTYO—all showcased here) are succeeding and amassing followings with more experimental styles. Further, Nast sounds better on the subsequent track, “Money Man,” where he apes Rocky’s flow.Cozy Tapes’ emphasis on Rocky brings into question why it was ever turned into a group effort. Even the guests—most notably Tyler, the Creator, Wiz Khalifa, Skepta, and BJ the Chicago Kid—highlight Rocky, rather than upstage him. The most obvious answer is that the album is a tribute to the late Mob co-founder A$AP Yams, who would have wanted to see all of his friends excel. Yams was the architect of the A$AP sound, which has always been defined more by coolness than sonic markers: When Rocky made the big-budget shift from LIVE.LOVE to LONG.LIVE, a forward-thinking attitude remained consistent. Yams posthumously executive produced Rocky’s AT.LONG.LAST.A$AP, but that record felt more like what Yams would’ve wanted Rocky to make (that is, follow his heart) than what he, himself, would produce (a detritus-free swag rap album). Despite admirable verses, Cozy Tapes proves that A$AP Mob does not need to be Wu-Tang or Odd Future to succeed as a collective. It’s acceptable to have a star and a backup, with a few talented MCs to round things out and play straightman to the others’ flashy ways.Cozy Tapes Vol. 1: Friends- is a very good hip-hop record even if it arrives at a time where the A$AP Mob are not at the center of the hip-hop zeitgeist. Rocky consistently entertains without delivering any one-liners, and the album is sequenced to mask some of the lesser members’ weaknesses. Cozy Tapes stays true to its name. The Mob grew immensely and then lost its spiritual guide, just as it needed someone to give them direction. In Yams’ memory, they turned inward looked at what they did best. It may not be the most ostentatious effort. But it is comfortable.As a founder of indie rock institutions Dinosaur Jr., Sebadoh, and Folk Implosion, Lou Barlow’s career is synonymous with the scratchy production of an iconic lo-fi pioneer. When Barlow started releasing albums under his own name with 2005’s Emoh, he redefined himself as a more traditional singer-songwriter. And with last year’s Brace the Wave, he stepped even more decisively into “maturity” by crafting a solemn post-divorce album filled with complex adult emotions.Barlow’s hushed singing on Brace the Wave conveyed the panic inherent in facing a major midlife upheaval. But after such a personal album, his new five-song EP Apocalypse Fetish feels like a retreat from a late-career blossom. As its title suggests, the new EP tackles end-of-the-world angst, which might have made for a suitable counterpoint to Brace the Wave’s lyrical themes if Barlow hadn’t chosen to strip the new material down so that it emphasizes his voice and down-tuned ukulele.Barlow has been playing the ukulele since Dinosaur Jr.’s 1987 album You’re Living All Over Me—long before it became the instrument of choice for cute YouTube covers. But Barlow has never fallen prey to the preciousness that is often ascribed to the instrument. On Brace the Wave, for example, he used a baritone ukulele as a textured guitar, not a prop in a play. This time around, though, the ukulele booms in the middle of the mix, the toylike timbre of its strings offsetting the musical balance like a bull in a china shop.Of course, we’ve heard skeletal arrangements and jarring mix choices from Barlow plenty of times before. But strangely enough, Apocalypse Fetish stumbles into murky waters, as if Barlow couldn't decide between returning to his lo-fi days or sticking with his current, more discreetly elegant sound. Like Brace the Wave, Apocalypse Fetish is full of additional trimmings that Barlow and returning producer Justin Pizzoferrato tuck behind the backbone of the songs. On the title track, for example, a sudden appearance of acoustic guitar and keyboard in tandem splashes the song with drama and color. Barlow even double-tracks the ukulele at times and his bass remains more felt than heard. Still Pizzoferrato’s naked recording style that served Brace the Wave so well only highlights how incomplete these new arrangements are.As these songs show, Barlow isn't losing a step as a composer—his craft sounds more effortless as he grows. Unfortunately, Apocalypse Fetish is far too easy to mistake for a bunch of demos. On “Anniversary Song,” the absence of percussion actually strengthens the choogling rhythm of Barlow’s strumming, but it’s still framed as though he were performing it in a coffeehouse. Even if you think that works the first time around, Barlow scoops the percussion again two songs later on “Try 2 B,” a song that betrays the barroom rock‘n’roll stomper it truly is at heart.Likewise, the ends of some of his verses on “Pour Reward” glow with a tail of reverb, but the song never finds the middle ground between its dry immediacy and its atmospheric gestures. “Don’t trust anyone/When it's us who can't be trusted,” Barlow sings on the title track. “We’re perverse/The safer we are/The more unsafe we feel/That’s the curse.” Having fleshed out personal crisis so thoroughly the last time around, it's anyone's guess as to why Barlow holds back from doing so while tackling a major social crisis on this EP. But by this point, Barlow is well beyond having to force the raw amateurism that once defined him. He’s no amateur anymore, as even Apocalypse Fetish proves in spite of itself.Brevity is among Mannequin Pussy’s strengths, but a controlled volatility is the Philadelphia quartet’s calling card. The mood of any given song can zap with a disconcerting swiftness from the playful to the chaotic. This dynamic persists on record and on stage. Opening for Colleen Green at Baltimore’s Metro Gallery last August, the band kicked up a series of shoegaze-y whorls, detonating their abrupt thrash-punk before the audience could let its guard down.Beginning in New York City, Mannequin Pussy was formed by childhood friends Marisa Dabice and Thanasi Paul, and their early demos set an ineffable foundation: indecipherable, sub-minute hardcore bursts, propelled by Paul’s sharp drumming and Dabice’s lashed punk chords. By 2014 debut LP Gypsy Pervert, the melodies buried in the group’s sound had clawed their way to the surface. Paul swapped out his drum kit for a guitar, and the band’s lineup reshuffled, while track lengths expanded modestly. Significantly, Dabice found her footing as a singer and songwriter, as evidenced by smart standouts like “Clue Juice” and “My Baby (Axe Nice),” where second-wave American punk and 1990s cuddlecore made uneasy common cause.For all of Pervert’s advances, it never quite gelled as an album. Romantic does. Its volcanic peaks and gauzy valleys hew to a sequential logic; neither a build nor a decline, but rather, the ferocious push-pull of a mosh pit. Dabice’s vocals have taken on a bitter insistency that suits themes best described as interpersonally political. Romantic also benefits from a consistent, road-tested lineup that includes bassist Colins Regisford and drummer Kaleen Reading. This tautness allows the band to double down on what it does best and roll a few dice.All lurch and glossolalia, “Pledge” suggests a lost My Bloody Valentine single harboring the paranoid stoicism of death metal. “Meatslave One” is a 56-second lamentation of smart-phone narcissism dressed in grunge flannel. The turbulent “Emotional High” and “Kiss” treat friend-dynamics from near and distant removes, respectively, with no punches pulled. On “Beside Yourself,” the don’t-look-back anthem that closes the album, the four mass their voices in angelic chorus to leaven what is a jagged, collective scorching of earth.A wild energy animates the 20-minute Romantic, as it spills out in every direction. This is most evident on “Ten” and “Denial,” when Dabice’s personality is especially harried and panicky, her lyrics Jenga-stacked and tripping over themselves, the songs supercharged. “Ten” rails against that kind of depression that can confine you to your bedroom, buckling so hard that the song risks shaking itself into pieces. “Denial,” a jangly, introspective self-inventory, explodes in wracked gasps. “Pick yourself up, baby, everything’s gonna be fine, but if not, so what?” she counsels, pleading. “You’ll get it right the next time/You should stop getting down on yourself, everyday.” These are words to live by.Sid Vicious loved ABBA. Joe Strummer loved ABBA. Pete Townshend really loved ABBA. As a five year-old boy on a Welsh council estate in 1977, I loved ABBA. My mum and dad loved ABBA. If ever I went round to a friend’s house whose parents had a record player in the living room, you could count on there being an ABBA LP leaning in the Formica cabinet beside it. Everyone, so it seemed in my five year-old’s perspective of the universe, loved ABBA.  The four Swedes—two couples, Agnetha and Björn, Benny and Anni-Frid (aka “Frida”)—first invaded British shores in 1974 at the Eurovision Song Contest in Brighton with their winning entry, “Waterloo”; the United Kingdom awarded ABBA “nil points” on the night, making their subsequent domination of our charts one of the sweetest revenges outside the pages of The Count Of Monte Cristo. They properly conquered in 1976 with their Greatest Hits, the year’s biggest-selling album and the second biggest-selling album in Britain of the 1970s (beaten by Simon & Garfunkel’s Bridge Over Troubled Water which had the advantage of a six-year head start). The same year saw a triptych of UK number ones: “Money, Money, Money,” “Fernando,” and the unstoppable “Dancing Queen,” which sold over a million copies and spent six solid weeks at the top. That the latter’s parent album, Arrival released in October 1976, should consolidate their stronghold was a fait accompli. By 1977 ABBA were unshiftable, omnipresent and commercially invincible.  Arrival was their fourth studio album but the first to forge an identity in tandem with its introduction of their soon-to-be iconic trademark reversed B logo. Its three predecessors—1973’s Ring Ring, 1974’s Waterloo, and 1975’s ABBA—had been a series of costume-changing forays and false-starts through folk-rock, glam, light ballads, and novelty rock‘n’roll. Nobody yet regarded ABBA as an albums band until the million-selling phenomenon of 1976’s Greatest Hits propelled them to the forefront of the market. An intriguingly-misnamed 15 track compilation from an act who’d so far made the UK singles charts just five times, to British audiences Greatest Hits acted as ABBA’s equivalent to a debut album, its success highlighting a major transformative shift: from the bedroom turntable at 45 rpm to the family stereo at 33 1/3. ABBA could never have succeeded as a teen pop act alone. The coup of Greatest Hits owed much to its appeal to the same age group as seen on its cover: four adults sat on a park bench in contrastingly coupled yin and yang of romantic bliss and collapse.   If Greatest Hits certified ABBA as undisputed superstars, on Arrival, the first album to follow it six months later, they finally looked like superstars, the kind who travelled in private helicopters like the one on the cover in which they’re cocooned with curiously cool expressions. The distance between this image and the terrestrial park bench portrait of Greatest Hits can be measured in light years. They could be The Tomorrow People. They could be from Tatooine. They could be four superbeings itching to escape some spooky spherical Phantom Zone. They are unmistakably other.  At their best, as on Arrival, ABBA are as mysteriously out-there as Bowie, as rococo as Phil Spector, as unbearably sad as the Smiths. At the centre of their infinitely bright star is a throbbing black mass of pain. “The Winner Takes It All” from 1980’s Super Trouper is still the debate-settler that ABBA are pop’s greatest tragedians, hailing as they do from a land of inherently fatalistic art, from the films of Ingmar Bergman to the face of Greta Garbo. The pagan Swedes of old believed that the end of the world was a coming inevitability they called “ragnarok.” ABBA are the sweet echo of that same ancient stoic pessimism. Ragnarok‘n’roll.  The second track on Arrival and ABBA’s only US number one in April 1977, “Dancing Queen” is one of the greatest pop records ever made because, like so many of the greatest pop records ever made, it throws multiple reflections. Its surface beauty and emotional depth is wholly dependent on the ear of its beholder. For some, it’s an emancipatory cry of joy. For others, a bawl from an abyss of sorrow. The song’s first discernible human sound is a suspended, exhaled “Ooo-ooh!” It could be a dove-like coo, or it could be a suppressed sob. Perhaps this is the song of someone who wants to be Esmeralda but knows they are Quasimodo; the harrowing dream of life outside as imagined by somebody imprisoned indoors. The “dancing queen” could be an isolated young girl alone in her bedroom, too scared, too shy, almost certainly believing herself too hideous to step out into Friday night; her one happiness her unrealistic fantasy that she could find love amongst the beautiful people out on the dancefloor.  In this, its darkest reflection, the one directed by Bergman and starring Garbo, “Dancing Queen” is a song about the loneliest girl in the world, a “How Soon Is Now?” in “Rock Your Baby”’s clothing.   It’s safe to say that the ABBA writing team of Benny Andersson, Björn Ulvaeus, and manager Stig Anderson were not trying to create a “How Soon Is Now?”; the abandoned first verse of its original 1975 demo began with the bubble-gum burst of “Baby, baby, you’re outta sight!” But they were trying to write a “Rock Your Baby.” The rhythm of “Dancing Queen” was directly inspired by George McCrae’s 1974 hit, even if theirs hasn’t quite the same slickness of syncopation. There’s a strange falter, as if the beat is stumbling under the weight of the flamboyant Liberace piano pounding overhead. “Dancing Queen” is almost disco, were it not for that rhythmic limp. It’s clubfooted disco, American R&B as could only be made by white Vikings who didn’t fully understand the instructions.  The power of their music lies in the enigmatic Mona Lisa smile created by similar accidents of mistranslation. As Andersson once stressed, “We are not Anglo-Saxon.” ABBA were four spectacularly talented Nordic persons trying to emulate Western Anglo-Saxon pop. Their ancestral blood was non-Christian, an ice-and-fire race who believed in giants, dwarves and elves, of ancient pagan sagas that inspired Wagner and Tolkien. The members of ABBA could learn and sing in English, but they still thought like Scandinavians. Their phrasings made grammatical sense but their assembly of words were not the natural choices of any lyricist for whom English was a first language.  It may also explain why the biggest-selling album in Britain of 1977 opens with a song about a schoolgirl aching to sleep with her geometry teacher. There is no ambiguity of meaning in the harmonic rush of “When I Kissed The Teacher.” “One of these days,” sings Agnetha, “gonna teach him a lesson alright.” The moral dilemma of this unexpurgated Lolita pop is only numbed by its sheer innocence of delivery. But then “love” in ABBA songs, legal or otherwise, rarely runs smooth. “My Love, My Life” and “Knowing Me, Knowing You” are two adjoining sides of the same heartbroken prism, the words of both virtually interchangeable. “I know I don’t possess you/So go away, God bless you” wails the first. “Breaking up is never easy I know/But I have to go,” sighs the second. In ABBA songs people are always going, never to but forever away.  None of the lyrical protagonists on Arrival are happy. “Carrie,” the heroine of the neurotic disco-ragtime “That’s Me,” is a self-deprecating mess. The woman in the daft “Dum Dum Diddle” is ill with sexual frustration, literal second fiddle to her maestro lover who’d sooner pluck his Stradivarius. The narrator of the Cabaret-inspired “Money, Money, Money” yearns for a rich Trump-style suitor, but “if he happens to be free, I bet he wouldn’t fancy me.” Men, too, get just as raw a deal on “Why Did It Have To Be Me?,” Björn’s barroom boogie about a sap who loses his heart, all but one lap-steel and two fingers of whisky short of vintage Hank Williams.    And then along comes Jack the Ripper. “I am behind you, I’ll always find you,” screech the banshee sisterhood of Agnetha and Frida on the predatory “Tiger,” a fabulously unsettling psycho-pop thriller of urban dystopia and Droogish violence not so very far away from Diamond Dogs: “The city is a nightmare, a horrible dream.” “Tiger” is an alarmist horror story of metropolitan evil as imagined by folk who did most of their songwriting in an idyllic country cottage on Stockholm’s island peninsula. It’s also one of the better demonstrations of the sonic voodoo that occurs in the vacuum between Agnetha’s and Frida’s voices, a skull-rattling counterpoint when their respective wavelengths collide to create a near-supernatural vibration.   This same nuclear fusion of blonde soprano and auburn mezzo-soprano is why all attempts to cover ABBA songs end in failure. They are literally inimitable. ABBA’s music lands on the ear in bold strokes, but it arrives there through the most meticulous construction. They are not European impressionists but Northern renaissance masters, building up the sound layer by layer, one coat at a time with fanatical precision. Hence the glow in the opening notes of “My Love, My Life,” an ethereal cosmic tone evoking the fellow Scandinavian-blooded Gustav Holst. Hence the Valkyrie choir of “Dancing Queen” detonating its apocalypse of goosebumps. And hence why Arrival’s closing title track feels like being serenaded to sleep by God.  “Arrival,” the song, is colossal. Less a song, since there are no words, than a glacier of sound, the eerie buzz of divine light as it harpoons through stormy clouds. “Arrival” was named after the title of the album had already been decided. As originally written it was called “Ode to Dalecarlia” in honour of the Swedish folk province where, as late as the 19th century, the local culture still communicated in medieval runes straight out of The Hobbit. Melodically, “Arrival” is therefore ABBA at their most inscrutably Nordic and, to Anglo-Saxon ears, at their most other. It is a hymn from beyond the stars.  Last month it was announced that ABBA are due to make a live “comeback” of sorts in 2018, though seemingly not in physical body but some form of virtual spirit. Described as “a time machine,” the project in partnership with American Idol mogul Simon Fuller will “enable a new generation of fans to see, hear, and feel ABBA in a way previously unimagined.” Touring holograms, perhaps? If so, it would be a fitting fate for the intangible enigma of ABBA. At once here and not here, teasing us in the void between. Forty years later, still waiting for them to arrive.      Pras Michel first came to Wyclef Jean at his dad’s church in New Jersey looking to join a band, not a rap group. Wyclef was already something of a local celebrity in the mid ’80s, writing raps in a session produced by Kurtis Blow for a group called Exact Change (on a single recording that was never released), and picking up the nickname the Rap Translator. Pras sought out Clef to play trumpet in the church band. As Wyclef tells it, Pras was a dreadful trumpet player, but he introduced Wyclef to two young musicians from his Newark high school: the mononymously known “Marcy” and a choir singer named Lauryn Hill. Even then, Hill was preternaturally talented, with a deep-rooted knowledge of R&B and Motown soul. Pras was an instrumentalist who was privy to rap as a kid but blocked from listening to it, instead spending long afternoons scanning the dials of his family radio for hard and soft rock. And he sought out Wyclef, who was already adapting the music of the Caribbean to fit his own, to add more reggae flavor into the mix. When Marcy abandoned the group after a few sessions, the trio adopted the name Tranzlator Crew, then later, Fugees.The Fugees, as many have come to know them, appeared fully formed in 1996 on “Fu-Gee-La,” the lead single from the trio’s ground-breaking, major label opus, The Score. But “Fu-Gee-La” predated the polished, finished project, starting as a raw loosie produced on the fringes of a session for a “Vocab” remix. It was created in the early-mid ’90s when the group was still experimenting, on a beat Salaam Remi originally made for Fat Joe. In those moments, before The Score was even conceived, the Fugees were slowly coalescing into a unit. Under the direction of Kool & the Gang co-founder Khalis Bayyan (then Ronald Bell), they were working on their debut album called Blunted on Reality.Each member had a unique musical history, leading to a sonic information trade of sorts—capitalizing on Lauryn’s internal soul music archive, Pras’ hard- and soft-rock reference points, and Wyclef’s reggae reworks. The smorgasbord of sound registered as rap but only when stripping several layers of context away; the Fugees packed reggae-flecked, raucous romps and remixes into 18 tracks, and attempted to package it as traditionalist hip-hop. The result was a commercial flop, selling (literally) 12 copies, and sending the group back to the drawing board. For all its eclecticism, Blunted on Reality is still a relic of its era—heavily indebted to rap’s elite samplers and sound-bending maestros De La Soul, A Tribe Called Quest, Main Source, and even Digable Planets—and it's a bit raw and rough around the edges, a mostly croon-free ragga rap opus that’s far less explicit with its social and political ideals than The Score but twice as enthusiastic. The album scans as a style sampler of early ’90s alt hip-hop. But with the benefit of hindsight, it’s a fun, low-stakes gambit straddling the margins of boom bap, jazz rap, and reggae fusion without pause, and it’s a transformative experience for its MCs.The trio have said in the past that they let producers wrestle away creative control of the record, creating a product they didn't recognize, and they carefully distanced themselves from it during the press junket for The Score. But Blunted on Reality is essential to the myth of the Fugees and to the sonics of their seminal album. Without this commercial misfire, there is no colossal comeback story, no extra push to silence naysayers who wrote the album off as a failure, and they couldn’t have made something as refined as The Score without making this record first. Despite its status as the underwhelming precursor to a classic, Blunted on Reality is a marvel of pure energy and noise that musters up rage and exuberance in equal measure. It’s clearly a response to racial injustice, xenophobia, and inner-city violence, but the album never wages war with any of these topics directly. Instead, there are one-off references to shootings, to the Klan and black oppression, and to intolerance, amid a party pack. Its zeal is sadly as timely as ever. “Hide nigga hide, flee nigga flee, run nigga run/For I’ve got my hood, my cross, my tree, my gun/My rope, and it’s a long one,” Lauryn recites in the intro. Seconds later, Wyclef puts it even more plainly: “You maintain to put a negro in pain.”Blunted on Reality sits squarely at the intersection of New York City and Croix-des-Bouquets, mixing big-city swagger with an outsider’s mentality (ideas best articulated by interludes “Harlem Chit Chat” and “Da Kid From Haiti”). The reggae influence lines the seams of songs like “Temple” and “Refugees on the Mic,” which forgo heavy boom-bap for more leisurely, island-friendly tempos. The accents disappear on the shout-rap tracks, but sneak out for the hooks on “Recharge” and “Boof Baf” and in the opening moments of “Giggles.” It’s a triumph of black American immigrants, constantly mixing cultural cues. The breakbeat on the roughneck rousing “How Hard Is It?” is almost New Jack Swing-like, while “Nappy Heads” makes an escapist anthem out of an Earth, Wind, and Fire ballad. Slowly but surely, the Fugees find their voices on Blunted on Reality, taking turns with bludgeoning verses that do most of their damage with sheer force. Lauryn often sounds MC Lyte-ish in her inflections, less assured and measured in her pronunciations than she would become on later albums, but she is still clearly the group’s X factor, with raps that burst at the seams and a standout solo cut (“Some Seek Stardom”). When the dust had settled, the trio had three hit singles and a platinum album to their name, and Blunted on Reality had been reduced to an asterisk in the Fugee story, Lauryn would later tell Ebony in November ’96 that “kids need to know there’s more to life than a five-block radius,” that the Fugees spoke for the disenfranchised. The Score delivered that in its messages, but before that, Blunted on Reality proved it with an uncompromising sound. Sun Ra’s presence on the latest Merzbow record is odd: blink and you might miss him completely, but squint and you can notice him almost everywhere. The only time it’s blatantly obvious that Masami Akita, the man behind noise legend Merzbow, is using Sun Ra’s recordings as source material comes in the first 10 seconds of Strange City. Opener “Livid Sun Loop” begins with overlapping saxophones and drums, but Akita quickly steamrolls those into a dense cacophony. For the rest of the album’s 103 minutes (66 on CD and 36 on LP, both titled Strange City but containing different music), he steadfastly maintains that busy din.Yet focus your ears intensely on Strange City—preferably through headphones—and Sun Ra’s music peeks out through Merzbow’s noise wall. (The Ra estate gave Akita material from 1966’s The Magic City and 1967’s Strange Strings, which he remixed and treated while adding his own original sounds). Rattling drumbeats grow out of crackling static like weeds in a garden, bassy rhythms undulate beneath rolling roars like shifting tectonic plates, and pretty much every screech and squeal could pass for a wailing horn. Strange City is decisively a Merzbow record, but Sun Ra lives in its DNA.Where Strange City stands in Merzbow’s massive discography is easier to suss out. Many of the strengths Akita has developed over roughly four decades of noise devotion are put to use here. He creates relentlessly forward-moving music with so much going on that it feels three-dimensional. During such lengthy tracks, your ears and brain accept and acclimate to Akita’s ruthless sounds, and his seemingly random noise eventually starts to feel normal.Strange City is most successful on the two half-hour-plus tracks that make up the CD version. “Livid Sun Loop” is filled with destructive sounds and stabbing rhythms, but it also has a narrative arc developed through 32 minutes of sonic drilling. On “Granular Jazz Part 2,” Akita grapples most seriously with Sun Ra’s creative spirit. Devoted primarily to the trebly end of the spectrum, the piece subtly rides Ra’s rhythms while building a space-bound aura, a fitting way to grapple with an artist who claimed to come from Saturn.The three tracks on the LP version of Strange City—all titled as parts of “Granular Jazz”—are less distinctive. In some places, Akita falls back on stock noise moves like firing-laser jolts and helicopter-style whirr. Something interesting happens on every piece, though, and the closer “Granular Jazz Part 4” is particularly fascinating due to its relative restraint. Surprisingly distant and subdued, it’s like Merzbow’s ballad of Sun Ra, an elegy for a virtual partner coming after 100 minutes of sonic boxing. You could call Strange City a Merzbow victory, but it couldn’t have happened without Sun Ra on his team.Over the last few years Chicago has been one of hip-hop’s most conspicuous artistic incubators. This year alone, the hip-hop and R&B artists Jamila Woods, Joey Purp, Saba, and Kweku Collins have enjoyed breakout attention as indie auteurs with respective solo projects. All of them have worked with Chance the Rapper and others in the same scene, and two are signed to the same label, Closed Sessions. Now, that label’s house producer, oddCouple, is getting his turn with a new record called Liberation, which gathers up a bunch of this familiar Chicago talent for a showcase compilation. Born in Milwaukee but long based in Chicago, Zach Henderson adopted oddCouple as a solo act several years ago after initially sharing the name as half a duo. Henderson played bass and cello earlier in his life, and he now folds live instruments into his beats, which are warm and muffled and frequently meander towards breakdowns instead of looping back on themselves. Liberation follows 2015’s Chatterbox, which oscillated between a soulful instrumental beat tape and a rappers' roll call. This new one is more fleshed-out and timely, and finds oddCouple doubling down on the recent success of his counterparts and elevating his own craft at once. There isn’t an outright misstep, but since many of the featured artists on Liberation have recently released their own singular statements, a few performances feel second-rate or less than vital. Still, nothing here screens like a called-in favor, and Henderson is a smart matchmaker. Joey Purp stands out on “Visions,” a twinkling chipmunk soul loop that gets the producer’s characteristic build-it-up-to-break-it-down treatment. Purp is a casual, confident rapper with the rare knack to boil things down to palatability while avoiding cliche. “It’s the places we live in that they refuse to go/So when we speak about struggles they can refuse to know,” he raps. The woozy and feverish “Love Above” is set compellingly against a chorus that is upbeat and whimsical. The song switches up several times, back and forth between Kweku Collins and Jamila Woods, but its Woods’ wonky chorus that sticks.Several songs on Liberation feature strings, but none feel as big as those near the end of the album. On “Hereditary” oddCouple rolls out the red carpet for GLC, a veteran Chicago rapper who quietly helped pave the way for the city’s current relentless indie bent. (“Why you ain’t signed?/Wasn’t my time,” he rapped triumphantly on Kanye West’s first album.) The emcee hasn’t lost a step or the slur in his voice, never a flashy rapper but always a commanding presence. The Cleveland artist and Closed Session signee Kipp Stone gets a deserved look here too, making the best of a thoughtful hook with his raspy baritone, shouting “Just listen at me" and "Hands up, don’t shoot!” before the elder statesman launches into a gorgeous pair of verses. Musically, the most interesting moments on the album come at the end of songs, when Henderson redirects and then turns away from the vocalist he’s holding up, usually stripping back elements from the beat. He has a nimble way with transitions within a song, and is never abrupt about switching gears into sparse, live-played trail-offs; these moments feel like carefully placed and immediately recognizable fingerprints. Some of that effect is missing on the lone instrumental, a sleepy track that swells towards the dance floor but never commits fully. Still, a solitary send-off is a smart maneuver on a wider scale as well, and Henderson has done more than enough to stamp out his identity as a producer throughout. Ween famously broke up in 2012 after Aaron Freeman told Rolling Stone—but not his bandmate Mickey Melchiondo—that he needed time to convalesce after a drug-related breakdown. This marked the first time since 1984 that the two childhood friends would ostensibly retire their alter egos, Gene and Dean Ween, for their civilian names. While Freeman made it to the other side of that dark period with a baptismally purgative album, Melchiondo remained the same technically gifted clown in all his endeavors. Now, this consistent energy extends to his solo debut with the Dean Ween Group, the first invocation of his original band on an album since its dissolution and recent reinstatement. And in its ambitious genre hopping and sometimes-hilarious-sometimes-cringeworthy childishness, The Deaner Album is the closest thing to a proper Ween album in a decade.Much like Ween’s early output—think God Ween Satan: The Oneness through Chocolate and Cheese—The Deaner Album is a collagist pursuit that simultaneously honors and apes the various styles it probes. “Mercedes Benz” experiments with the funky lurch of Parliament-Funkadelic, while “Shwartze Pete” celebrates Les Paul with the legend’s nasally, vintage guitar noodling. Lead track “Dickie Betts,” an instrumental highlight, is an improvisational southern rock tribute to the former Allman Brothers Band guitarist, and maybe even a self-referential nod to the guitarist’s leap from second to first in command.Most noticeably, however, The Deaner Album intuitively echoes songs that have populated Ween’s variegated discography, something that seems inevitable given the band’s self-perpetuating mythology—their “brownness.” The arena-primed “Garry” sounds like if Chocolate And Cheese’s “A Tear for Eddie” was reconfigured as a Lynyrd Skynyrd ballad, while “Gum,” a truly grating listening experience during which Melchiondo lists kinds of gum, is a close cousin to “Candi” and borrows the disquieting triangle jabs of “Spinal Meningitis.” And of course, this wouldn’t be a Ween-peripheral record without a shit reference so “Doo Doo Chasers” checks that box and ends the record on a particularly brown note, much the way “Poop Ship Destroyer” concludes Pure Guava.Puerile antics are seemingly foundational to what made Ween so great, but really it was the band’s delicate balance of sincerity and irreverent surrealism. This had everything to do with the dynamic between Gene and Dean, the former a more philosophically minded, if outlandish, songwriter, the latter the brash, instrumental wonk. So even though Dean’s album features guest appearances from the Meat Puppets’ Curt Kirkwood, and punk drummer Chuck Treece, The Deaner Album lacks a fundamental humaneness and veers toward uncouth, guitar face-inducing force.This pays dividends for the bar-rock and instrumental tracks on this record, but a lot of the lyrics and imagery can be ham-fisted (“Charlie Brown” is a song about being unlucky, for example), and in one case, crudely misogynistic. “Tammy” is a seedy tale whose chorus details using the song’s namesake as a sexual object and then murdering her with a shotgun: “Tammy, bring me my Shammy/So I can clean my shotgun and bury you below.” Ween occasionally made forays into politically incorrect territory, but Deaner’s latest entry isn’t so much funny as it is straightforwardly unnerving.The comedic and lyrical height of this record, however, belongs to “Exercise Man,” which paints a plainspoken portrait of a “fucking douchebag exercise man,” who works out every day even though he will “die at 57 of a heart attack.” It is a really quick, blunt song about the futility of constructive behavior and boasts the description: “He uses the weight room at the Motel 6,” which should have been a punchline about Drake’s softness three years ago. It’s aware that it’s aggro and is brutally funny. And perhaps that is the small magic of The Deaner Album: it makes you feel like you are in on a longstanding inside joke with an old friend. Even if the joke is super dumb and at times problematic, it is strangely comforting to know that the guy responsible hasn’t changed one iota. At 11 albums strong, Common’s career has passed through so many stages that he’s got a trail of shed skins, including two or three different rappers (and half a rockstar) along the way. So when his later-period albums, from 2014’s tough and sorrowful Nobody’s Smiling to this week’s striking Black America Again, are called a return to form for the Chicago-bred MC, it may be important to clarify which form he’s returning to, and establish some signposts for hearing an album as momentous as this one is. Back in 2014, Common’s frequent collaborator Questlove called for a revival of protest music in the wake of a grand jury’s decision not to indict the police officer who killed Eric Garner. Scarcely two years on, ugly racial rhetoric has characterized a seemingly endless campaign season, outrage over extrajudicial police killings has taken on a sort of sick rhythm, and it’s actually hard to remember a world where there was a shortage of protest music. D’Angelo’s Black Messiah, Kendrick Lamar’s To Pimp a Butterfly and Solange’s A Seat At the Table, among others, have upended expectations and reinvigorated and expanded the category frames (hip-hop, soul or simply black music) placed around them.This is important context for listening to Black America Again, partly because great albums from the Okayplayer/Soulquarian family seem to come in waves—and there is a strong case to be made that Black America Again is to Black Messiah what Like Water for Chocolate was to the 2000-era classics Voodoo and Things Fall Apart.  Some of the big-room soul flourishes (courtesy of John Legend and BJ the Chicago Kid) trend toward the thematically safer sound that characterized Com’s Oscar winning Selma song; a touch expected—corny, even—if still emotionally stirring. But overall Karriem Riggins’ gritty, moody production provides Com with his most eclectic (and apt) sonic backing since Kanye's production on Be. It may also be the angriest—and not coincidentally, sharpest lyrically—we've seen Com since his Ice Cube dis “Bitch In Yoo”—warmed-over beefs with Drake notwithstanding.Yet there is clearly more to Black America Again than just ripped-from-the-headlines timeliness. After all, in a season when #BlackLivesMatter is at the front of the public consciousness, pretty much every artist who shows up to the BET Awards (and a bunch who didn’t) has adopted the appropriate signifiers of Woke-ness—right down to erstwhile Rubber Band Man T.I.—without necessarily touching artistic greatness. It is, in fact, the way the current mood dovetails with Common’s personal story arc that gives it its power. After prophetically calling on America to “Impeach [Bush] and elect Obama” on Jadakiss’ 2004 “Why” remix, Com has arguably spent the Obama years seeking a worthy opponent for his battle skills—and failing to locate one. The bloodshed and racial tension of 2015-16 have finally focused his considerable firepower. It also doesn’t hurt that it was helmed by the brilliant Karriem Riggins, the Detroit-based drummer who has been a staple of Common’s live band for years—and who has truly stepped into his own with his production work here.Riggins works firmly in the post-metric genre-verse first explored by J Dilla, but he is one of the few beatmakers who can truly hang with the master. His sonically grungy, emotionally and rhythmically complex arrangements push Com’s flow into an off-balance, never-quite-slipping dance that will be familiar to longtime fans as Com’s zone. From the moment he stepped on the scene in the early ’90s, Com has been a sharp battle rapper, noted for laying down bars in solid combinations of gut-punches like a prize fighter, yet capable of a sort of tipsy whimsy when he allows himself to be loose.This is exactly the side of Common that Riggins’ compositions bring out of him, and for the first 10 tracks or so, the album flows along flawlessly. Frenetic drum patterns rush ahead of the beat even as noodle-y electric jazz textures and screwed vocal samples pull backward at different speeds, interrogating the meter of  “straight” time in ways that recall Dilla’s drunken drums. Bilal’s vocals add another layer of virtuosic dissonance to several tracks while Common’s Yoda-like constructions (“As dirty as the water in Flint the system is”) create internal rhyme schemes and tripping-into-the-next bar rhyme schemes in counterpoint with the off-kilter beats.The chemistry is so right, in fact, it’s enough to make you re-evaluate Com’s career arc, at least since 2000. For many fans his artistic growth peaked in the Soulquarian era, then spun out on Electric Circus where he maybe got a bit too loose. In this reading of Common’s story arc, recent outings (2011’s The Dreamer/The Believer; 2014’s Nobody’s Smiling) are less comeback triumphs than back-to-basics bootcamps, or the solid road-game victories he needed before he regained the confidence to stretch out and loosen up a little again.The single and title track “Black America Again” is a brilliant case in point; huge piano chords overpower a drum break that is EQ’ed into such crispy upper reaches of the treble range that it threatens to disappear, an inversion of all conventional pop or hip-hop logic. Even Stevie Wonder’s relentlessly melodious voice is chopped and phrased in unexpected ways and Com’s delivery channels the spoken-word of his idols the Last Poets in a way that stands alongside his very best verses: “You know, you know we from a family of fighters/Fought in your wars and our wars/You put a n***a in Star Wars/Maybe you need two/And then maybe then we’ll believe you.”Momentum falters a bit on “The Day Women Took Over” a well-meaning narrative that posits woman-power as the solution to all problems but reduces them to embodiments of abstract virtues, rather than identities or agents of their own desires, reminiscent of Spike Lee’s Chi-Raq. But Common finds his footing again with “Little Chicago Boy” (the requisite variation on “Pop’s Rap”) and “Letter to the Free,” which serves as a sort of closing argument. If it ends the album on a more sedate note, the choice feels deliberate, reminding us that in his most inspiring moments, Common is swinging at the Big Questions of our time, and that even his loose improvisations are still part of a larger project. It’s very much worth unpacking that project, since it both dovetails with and cuts against the grain of modern Black activist thought. Common has in fact taken heat for suggesting in interviews that Black people should respond to racism by “extending my hand in love.” Even as he gives voice to his hurt and anger and eloquently runs down the undeniable crimes committed against Black Americans, he seems to be asking again throughout the album’s lyrics what freedom could even look like in this America—and time and again he suggests that freedom itself is an act of improvisation, of imagination, that begins now: “We write our own story.”It’s in the context of these bigger ideas that Com lands some of his biggest gut-punches of all time, while rapping in his simpler, prize fighter mode: “No consolation prize for the dehumanized/For America to rise/It’s a matter of Black lives/And we gon’ free them so we can free us…”—bringing home again the sheer magnitude of the forces he’s been dancing with all along.The music of Sam Ray’s Ricky Eat Acid project has always elicited a kind of déjà vu. Whether it’s his journal-entry song titles or the way his music sounds like field recordings of a mental thunderstorm, the experimental producer/songwriter tricks you into thinking you are hearing extracted elements of your own past. Describing the inspiration of a mix he curated in 2014, Ray mentioned his fascination with a “paranoid, summer-y feeling that something familiar isn’t as familiar as it looks at first glance.” Though his sizable discography has often mined regret and retrospection, Talk to You Soon is the most severe account of an emotional haunting. It explores the idea of how personal upheaval perverts both memory and the comfort of nostalgia. There is a strange paradox about the way we remember things. As Israeli neuroscientist Yadin Dudai explained it on a 2007 episode of Radiolab: “If you have a memory, the more you use it, the more likely you are to change it. So, if you never use your memory, it is secured.” Such is the way that Ray explores this fixation of the past. On several songs, lyrics are cast as repeated chants that assume different meanings from their first utterance to their final. Where “Nice to See You” transforms from robotic to sincere with its eponymous phrase, “This Is as Close to Heaven as I Get” degrades from blissful to sinister over the course of a dozen repetitions of the song’s titular statement. The beautiful, far-too-short midpoint of the record, “Know,” interpolates the unfinished clause “Before I know you” into various phrases, including the forlorn “It seems to me, that you’d be happier/Before I know you.” By playing with these repetitions, Talk to You Soon asks at what point does gazing inward turn from self-reflection to distortion.While Ray’s previous Ricky LP, Three Love Songs, was an ambient record indebted to the KLF’s warped field recordings, Talk to You Soon feels more like impressionistic vignettes about the disparate feelings born out of trauma. From the moment the swirls of “‘hey’” introduce a dizzying volatility, complete with string arrangements from Owen Pallett, there is a nagging sense of discord. It’s the sonic equivalent of when someone says, “Hi, how are you?” and you say “Good!” even though you are moments from a nervous breakdown. The rest of the album roils on from there, and even if we are temporarily distracted by IDM-indebted beats or palliative synth glows, anxiety always looms in the margins.Ray’s piano playing has much to do with Talk to You Soon’s unraveling nerves. On “Spinning About Under the Bright Light in Bliss,” a gentle swell abruptly turns to percussive jabs. The underlying progression remains, but it is beleaguered by shrill notes as though Ray’s left and right hands are at war. “In the Grocery Store,” with its spectral melody, sounds impossibly distant from its mundane namesake and more akin to the title theme of The Exorcist. It’s these discrepancies that remind us that the world inside your head and the one you inhabit can be so unaware of each other. It doesn’t matter if you are in a supermarket, or fucking, or even having a good day—your mind can rebel at any moment.The closest Talk to You Soon comes to a complete psychotic break is the anarchic “As We Speak,” which features abrasive screaming from LA-based post-metal outfit Wreck and Reference. Unlike the unnerving electronics that whirred before, this track is a melting point of hoarse howling, crashing drums, and the wailing of an alarm siren. The acute panic attack lasts for a minute before yielding to an adrenalized heartbeat and veering into nervous percussive twitches. This moment is so abrasive, so intense, that the remainder of the album feels exhausted from its own introspection. Though maybe that’s the point Ray is trying to make here. Nominally, the final two tracks, “On a Good Day” and “‘ok’,” suggest that perhaps we have finally reached some calm after emotional tumult, but their languor recalls the dreary effects of overthinking. Can there be any respite for someone who lives so thoroughly inside their own mind, who is prone to over-analyzing and distorting the past? Although Ricky Eat Acid excels in making supernaturally empathetic music, these final moments of Talk to You Soon are especially isolating, a final warning to the listener that when gazing inward becomes pathological, it casts an endless pall.The afternoon before releasing Keep Flexin, Rich the Kid posted a video of himself dancing to the opening track, “I Don’t Care,” while puffing on a cigar and counting a stack of crisp hundred dollar bills. The video ends abruptly when a fire alarm goes off in the room—Rich freezes and drops his jaw with cartoonish flair before blurting, “Oh shit!” Staged or not, the video more or less sums up Rich the Kid’s playful charm: Here’s a guy who seems perpetually bemused by his own success even as he performs it.Rich the Kid has been a prolific presence in Atlanta rap for a few years now; Keep Flexin marks his seventh solo mixtape since 2013 and that’s not counting his numerous collaborative tapes with Migos, Makonnen, and his Rich Forever label signees. His sound is fairly straightforward by contemporary standards, especially when compared to that of his more distinctive peers like Lil Yachty or Lil Uzi Vert. Still, he’s mastered the fundamentals of Atlanta rap: an ear for melody, a hook better than most, and triplets like he’s the fourth Migo.In keeping with its title, Keep Flexin largely concerns itself with the trappings of wealth and stardom. Aesthetically speaking, Rich’s music can be called street rap, even if these songs feel far removed from the streets. These are light, bubbly anthems, befitting their shallow subject matter. “You hear that? That’s ice,” Rich explains at the outset of “Doors Up,” as he fidgets with his chains over a glimmering synth arpeggio. Airless lead single “Don’t Want Her” is nominally about the dispensability with which Rich views women (see the caustic refrain, “I throw out that bitch ‘cause she garbage”) but even here, he can’t help but boast, “Flexin’ I’m making them vomit/The rollie is water, it came out the faucet.” On “Liar Liar,” he jumps on the increasingly crowded bandwagon of Future impersonators, though as always, his outlook remains sunny (“I took a trip to the jeweler/I drop my wrist the in cooler”), in contrast to the song’s darker hue.Keep Flexin boasts an impressive roster of guests and for the most part, Rich puts them to good use. Jeremih smooths out the jerky “Greedy” with his gooey hook while matching his host’s braggadocio (“I count paper, don’t read it/Call me Mister Big Shot”). “Dat Way” finds Migos in prime form (“Pick up the phone and call Kanye,” Quavo instructs, alluding to Migos’ recent management deal with G.O.O.D. Music) over a twitchy, string-heavy beat. “Going” is essentially just one big Desiigner hook—your mileage here will vary depending on your personal tolerance for unintelligible gurgling and “Brrrrrah!” ad-libs. Disappointingly, Young Thug sounds pretty unengaged on “Ran It Up,” coloring inside the melodic lines that Rich establishes. Still, Thug manages to offer a brief window into his life (“Recording on the back of the bus and I’m po’d up”), evoking a devastating image of his idol from the documentary film The Carter: drugged-out, working feverishly, very much alone.This sort of tension is sorely missing from most of Keep Flexin, a record that’s happy to catalog the perks of being an ascendant rapper while turning a blind eye to the costs. While previous Rich the Kid releases like Trap Talk contrasted the street life that Rich had known with his current plush lifestyle, Keep Flexin offers few such juxtapositions. He does briefly acknowledge previous struggles on “Doors Up,” (“I was just hustling, I wanted a chance”) and on “Blessings,” he stops to take stock of how far he’s come: “I had to learn a lesson/Lose it all in a second/I made it here that’s a blessing/Get the money not stressing/You better count your blessings.” Rich the Kid certainly seems to live by that mantra, though he’ll need to dig deeper if he wants others to relate to his journey.Technically speaking, Australian musician Carla dal Forno is a singer-songwriter, but her solo debut album shows her mindset is closer to that of a lighting director or set designer. Where even experimental singer-songwriters privilege vocals and chord progressions, dal Forno emphasizes the marginal details,  to the extent that what we might think of as the “song” at the core of each track either dissolves outright or lingers in the background as a set of out-of-focus shapes.Dal Forno’s approach falls closer in spirit to ambient music. Only one song on You Know What It’s Like emphasizes her voice to the point where you’d consider it the “lead” vocal, and she doesn’t even sing on half the tracks. She obviously takes after Grouper in the way she occupies the sumptuous gloom of her songs like a ghost, but her grandiosity and shamanic presence suggest a subdued modern answer to an outsider-art icon like Moondog.Intro track “Italian Cinema” starts things off on an extravagantly strange note, with layers of sounds resembling the cyclic, serrated rotation of helicopter blades. At times, dal Forno uses found sounds—water pouring from a teapot to introduce “The Same Reply,” a crack of distant lightning at the beginning of “Fast Moving Cars”—to provide hints of setting. But she never lets the sounds eclipse the music's intensive focus on mood. Smoky and ominous, You Know What It’s Like simmers, both musically and thematically, with powerful undercurrents that dal Forno never quite spells out.On “Fast Moving Cars,” the album’s first vocal tune, dal Forno navigates that thorny zone of longing where she’s prodding the object of her affections not to be so passive. “It’s safe to assume that I like you best, so don’t be so frightened,” she sings. Her unassuming place in the mix actually serves the resolve in her voice—once you pick up on it, the album’s gravity becomes hard to deny. Even when dal Forno tips her hat to Nico on “What You Gonna Do Now?,” she still manages to stake out her own territory. Much like other singer-songwriters who march unequivocally to their own drummer, Carla dal Forno is willing to provoke listeners on a number of levels without spoon-feeding them. With You Know What It’s Like, she manages to do so on her own terms, in a way that feels both distant and inviting and rewards the listener’s willingness to sit with the ambiguity in between. Four years ago, in October of 2012, Nadya Tolokonnikova and Maria Alyokhina of Pussy Riot were sentenced to two years’ imprisonment for “hooliganism” after staging a protest performance in Moscow’s Cathedral of Christ the Savior. Pussy Riot leveraged performance and punk rock to critique the Putin regime as well as the Russian Orthodox Church. Although music was initially incidental to the project, Pussy Riot was championed in the Western imagination and among the international pop elite as a band—a characterization made manifest as Tolokno and Alyokhina were writ into riot-grrrl herstory and invited to perform alongside Madonna at a 2014 Amnesty International concert at the Barclays Center upon their release. As of last year, the pair has been releasing music for the music sphere, including the Eric Garner tribute “I Can’t Breathe,” a Le Tigre collaboration made for “House of Cards,” and a pro-refugee track filmed in Banksy’s Dismaland. Now, Tolokno is releasing a solo EP on Atlantic imprint Nice Life, produced by TV on the Radio’s Dave Sitek (who Tolokno also worked with on the chilling anti-corruption track “Chaika”).  Now, in a season where “pussy” has become a household word again, albeit for all the wrong reasons, the original pussy provocateurs have returned to exact their vengeance on macho would-be-rulers the world over. At least, that’s the narrative for Nadya Tolokno’s xxx EP. Working with pop music as a medium makes total sense for Tolokno, considering her irrefutable magnetism and keen understanding of media weaponization as well as the deity-like status with which we imbue pop music icons. That said, it’s disappointing to see the Pussy Riot name, which was built on principles of non-hierarchy, collectivity, and anti-capitalism, leveraged as a personal brand—something she has been critiqued for both by former members of the Pussy Riot collective and by other Russian feminists and activists. (Tolokno maintains that the Pussy Riot name can be taken up by anyone but as one meaning gets reified, the rest dematerialize.) The songs on xxx are a mixed bag. Two of the three tracks are written in English and either directly or indirectly anti-Trump. At a time when “the Russians” are synonymous with Bond villains or election hacking, there’s something thrilling about seeing Tolokno fire back at America’s own villainous tendencies. However, both of these tracks can ring a little hollow. Tolokno has said that “Straight Outta Vagina” was written as a response to patriarchy, misogyny, and the overrepresentation of dicks in pop music. In a phallocentric world where normalized derision of vaginas leads to lifelong body image issues, there’s a reason that Judy Chicago’s Dinner Party is in the Brooklyn Museum’s permanent collection. On the other hand, at a time when genital-centered essentialism is used by to perpetuate violence and to call for violent legislation against trans women, suggesting that only people with vaginas are affected by misogyny feels irresponsibly cis-sexist. Out of all the anti-Trump songs coming out recently, “Make America Great Again” is the most direct. It’s an earworm that’s not quite as disastrous as Le Tigre’s pro-Hillary jingle, though if we’re going by Tolokno’s own criteria (“Let other people in/Listen to your women/Stop killing black children”) it would be far more accurate to say that America Was Never Great. While the lyrics are relatively low key, the accompanying video is all-out brutal, splicing dystopian footage of real Trump speeches with gruesome imagery of Tolokno being branded, sexually assaulted, and tortured by Trump goons in orange wigs.  One of the more mesmerizing tracks is “Organs,” a deft Russian-language track (English translation can be read by enabling closed captions in YouTube) with Tolokno rapping on the interplay of bodies and the body politic while bathing nude in a tub of blood. “In 2014, I was released from prison and put into a bloody bath,” Tolokno tells The-Village.ru, citing “the annexation of Crimea, the fighting on the territory of Ukraine, the downed Boeing, attacks on political activists (including ourselves), the murder of [liberal politician] Boris Nemtsov.”The inspiration behind “Organs” is a sobering reminder that, burgeoning music profile aside, Tolokno is undertaking tangible, dangerous activism with regards to the Russian prison system. Shortly after getting out, Tolokno and Alyokhina co-founded Zona Prava, (Zone of Rights) an advocacy group meant to provide legal aid and informational support to prisoners, as well as Zona Pravda (Zone of Truth), a media site dedicated to in-depth coverage of courts, prisons, and labor camps, including trials, human rights abuses, hunger strikes. The video for “Straight Outta Vagina” co-stars a young girl in a balaclava, implying the potential of a new generation of feminists. Thinking about the inadequate, cursory coverage that the ongoing prison strike has gotten in American media, I can’t help but hope that the next generation is inspired not just by Tolokno’s fearlessness as a performer but also her fearlessness as an activist.Huerco S.'s music is mostly a process of addition-as-subtraction, piling up layers until the faintest outline of the original forms remains—something like Hans Christian Andersen's “The Princess and the Pea” but with magnetic tape in place of feather mattresses. Obscure shapes lurk beneath a dark, oil-slicked surface, and when they poke their heads out of the murk, the glimpse you get is like a grainy photo of the Loch Ness Monster—mostly just shadows and guesswork.On this cassette for New York's Quiet Time, he takes the technique to a new extreme. These objects, whatever they may be, have disappeared far beneath the surface, until even their shadows have dissolved into the cold water, and all that is left is the merest ripple on the surface. In keeping with the series' emphasis on long-form pieces, the tape consists of just one track. It is 31 minutes long, and at first it seems to consist of nothing more than a single held chord run through subtle effects. The other tapes in the series, by Aquarian, Baby, and Money, tend to be structured more like mixtapes. Aquarian's veers between drone, footwork, and acid; Baby, a Los Angeles trio of RISD grads, massage bassy rumble, heavy metal samples, and massing choirs into an ominous and enveloping head trip.Huerco S.'s tape is the softest of any of them so far, but with its unrelenting focus, it conveys a different kind of intensity. Turn it up loud enough and its atmospheres are all-enveloping; they invite you to dissolve into them. The longer and more intently you listen, the more detail opens up, although “detail” might not be the right word for a sound like this, worn smooth as limestone. But somewhere, deep down beneath all that reverb, the chord occasionally modulates, and slowly shifting EQ variously highlights different parts of the spectrum: swollen bass, burnished midrange, and bright, silvery highs.The Kansas City-raised, New York-based musician has done something like this before on Colonial Patterns' “ChunKee Player,” in which reverb, EQ, and tape compression sanded down the contours of a slow-moving chord progression—maybe strings, maybe synths, maybe something else entirely—to a pebbly blur. But that sketch wasn't even two minutes long, and it still betrayed the hint of a pulse. Drawing out the technique half an hour's length and pacing its changes in extreme slow motion exert an entirely different kind of force on the listener. It is a kind of deep-freeze ambient; it is beautiful in a way that tends to obliterate distinctions. Depending upon your mood, you may find it calming, gloomy, or perhaps even strangely emotionally blank. It is an empty shell around a fathomless, sourceless echo. There are no musical events to speak of, no attacks, no moments of distinction; just remnants of sounds, a memory of where a sound once was, like something heard from the other end of a long, dark tunnel that you no longer remember how to find your way back across.“We’re hoping that this be one of the greatest albums that ever come out.”Otis Redding says these words just before launching into “Respect” on April 8, 1966, wrapping up the first of seven sets he’d play over the course of three days at Los Angeles’ Whisky A Go Go. A few songs earlier, he first informed the crowd that they were recording the concert with plans of releasing it as an album, playing the newly-written “Good to Me” for the second time in nine songs simply because it was the single and they needed to get it right. For his ’66 stint at the Whisky A Go Go, he was backed by his road band, the Otis Redding Revue—a ten-piece group similar to the bands who supported him whenever he toured the south. This is the residency that is captured in its entirety on Stax’s six-disc box Live at the Whisky A Go Go: the Complete Recordings.Redding’s residency was a deliberate attempt on the part of the singer and his management to move him out of the Chitlin Circuit and into the mainstream. The idea wasn’t to have Otis record pop music, but rather bring his act straight to the rock audience. So they set up shop right on the Sunset Strip, home to such hip rock‘n’rollers as the Byrds, Love, the Turtles and the Doors, figuring there was no better place to introduce Redding to a white audience.Otis managed that crossover but not at the Whisky. It happened later at the Monterey International Pop Festival in ’67—backed then by Stax/Volt house band Booker T. & the M.G.’s—because he benefitted from the festival setting. In the open air, excitement spreads like fire. Indoors there is a different dynamic, particularly if it’s a crowd confronted with something they’ve never seen before, which was certainly the case of the Los Angelinos that headed to the Whisky to see Otis Redding that April weekend in 1966. Once Otis hit the stage on April 8, the applause was polite but not enthusiastic. He had to work to win that crowd, which he does by the end of the set, by which point they’re cheering “Respect.” At that point, Redding wasn’t unknown, particularly in R&B quarters—he had three Billboard R&B Top 10s, with a fourth soon to follow—but such gutbucket soul shows simply weren’t played in mainstream rock venues like the Whisky A Go Go.That alone made the three nights at the Whisky a step forward from Redding, who was hungry to become a star on his own terms. But the concerts alone weren’t the main thing: These shows were designed to be the primary source for an album, one that could capture the raw power of Redding on wax and hopefully bring in a wider audience. Throughout the seven full sets captured on Live at the Whisky A Go Go: the Complete Recordings—a box that doubles Stax’s 2010 set Live on the Sunset Strip, which contains about half of the sets from that April ’66 stint—Redding reminds the audience they’re cutting a record and, in a way, the sets are structured as recording sessions. Over the course of the seven shows, “(I Can’t Get No) Satisfaction” is played no fewer than ten times, a sure sign that Redding wanted to be sure he nailed this song for the album. A few other songs appear nearly that often (“I Can’t Turn You Loose,” “Good to Me”) but he also made sure to play almost every song he and his Revue knew, throwing in covers of James Brown’s “Papa’s Got a Brand New Bag” and the Beatles’ “A Hard Day’s Night” along the way—anything that could snag new listeners.Once Volt/Atco heard the tapes, they decided the performances were too raw to release. Not only was fidelity poor, but the band sometimes seemed ragged, veering out of tune and maybe not locking in on a groove. Stax/Volt founder Jim Stewart decided to shelve the record for reason, bringing out a version of it ’68 called In Person at the Whisky A Go Go only after Otis had died and the market demanded more Otis. The Whisky A Go Go tapes served that very purpose over the years, popping up on vinyl in 1982 as Recorded Live and almost a decade later on CD as Good to Me: Live at the Whisky A Go Go, Vol. 2, with some tracks popping up as bonus tracks on a 2008 deluxe edition of 1965’s Otis Blue. The double-disc Live on the Sunset Strip seeming like the last word in 2010.Live at the Whisky A Go Go: the Complete Recordings, however, trumps them all. It simultaneously emphasizes the consistency of Redding and his Revue along with their quirks. Listening to the sets back to back, it’s hard to hear where the band allegedly strays off path: Whatever flaws that may exist in a given track tend to melt away in the context of a full set. There’s an electricity to the performances even when they bring the tempo down for the slow-burners, and a great thing about this box is that there’s plenty of space for the band to play. On the 1968 LP, the longest number topped out just over five minutes but here performances routinely clock in between six and eight minutes, giving the band room to vamp while Otis works the crowd. It’s not only invigorating, but it suggests how Redding’s southern soul was tied to James Brown’s nascent funk. Listen to how he closes out Saturday’s first set with a marathon eight-minute “Satisfaction” then picks up the next set with the same song, stretching this version out to nine minutes via interlocking horn solos—it’s nearly 17 minutes of white-hot down-home vamping that is earthier than Brown and the J.B.’s but undoubtedly comes from the same source.Nevertheless, the greatest thing Live at the Whisky A Go Go: the Complete Recordings offers is so much vital live soul from an era where the sound was in its prime but was rarely recorded. Perhaps Booker T & the M.G.’s were a tighter outfit than the Otis Redding Revue, but the rawness heard on Live at the Whisky A Go Go: the Complete Recordings has its own singular virtues, particularly because so little of these southern soul acts were recorded in the ’60s. That alone would make this a worthy historical document but, better still, it remains exceptional because it captured a moment when a premiere showman worked his hardest to win over new fans. Decades later, these 1966 concerts at the Whisky A Go Go still possess the power to convert skeptics so seems that Otis Redding did indeed get his wish: He made one of the greatest albums that ever came out.The self-titled debut from the Olympians is a quintessential Daptone Records release, featuring many of the label’s best musicians as commissioned by the pianist and vibraphonist Toby Pazner. Pazner has played on many Daptone records himself, but he’s also occupied a Daptone-adjacent space as the keyboardist for the soul singer Lee Fields and others. That Aloe Blacc “I Need A Dollar” song you couldn’t escape—or stop listening to—in 2010? It was Pazner who played the signature piano take. As a listener, there’s a certain delight in chasing down session musicians in an album’s credits and threading together their careers. In jazz especially, that type of context is rewarding, knowing that this guy played with that guy and is now leading his own thing with both of them involved. This is the position Pazner is in with the Olympians, commanding a group of regulars that includes members of the Dap-Kings, Lee Fields’ band, and other players like Michael Leonhart, a noted trumpet prodigy who directs Steely Dan’s band and was formerly a house player for the now-defunct label Truth and Soul Records. The Olympians is a Pazner pet project years in the making: piling these instrumentalists on top of each other, boxing them in with smart arrangements, and then letting them out to play. A lot of The Olympians will sound familiar to Daptone devotees, but Pazner sneaks some ambitious switch-ups into a form frequently tied to grooves, and the addition of a sparse string section lends some space and delicacy to the sound. The usual discrete building blocks are never far: chugging wah-wah guitar, a persistently syncopated horn section, impeccable percussion. Halfway through “Venus,” a characteristically lush track that leans on bowing sideline strings, the song breaks in half—silent in the middle—to reveal a bumbling, then barking, then breathy, then rambling trumpet solo I’ve listened to dozens of times. Pazner smartly deploys dexterous solos like this throughout: an airy flute cuts through the end of the swampy funk opener “Sirens of Jupiter”; the reverse delay guitar on “Mars” achieves a measured psychedelic effect in contrast to the grace of the harp runs.There are riffs on the album that feel pleasantly misplaced or slyly repurposed, barely recognizable in their new setting. “Sirens of Jupiter” features a tucked away but recurring single-note vibraphone step down that jolts back to Menahan Street Band’s “Tired of Fighting.” Pazner, unsurprisingly, played the instrument on both songs. Later, “Europa and the Bull” opens with a first-generation drum machine ping and sighing guitar twang that evokes Shuggie Otis on Inspiration Information. The Olympians also sometimes tries to do too much: When “Mars” gives way to “Neptune,” a slowly uplifting number that almost floats away, it sounds like a heart-attack inducing cop chase scene that cuts into a happy-ending montage. The transitions between songs sometimes feel jostled together or even like sequencing mistakes. Still, like good session musicians, the Olympians never sound out of pocket. Pazner has a fever-dream like backstory for The Olympians that explains the mythical band name and song titles, as if this were soul music for or from the Greek Gods. Perhaps it’s a more compelling narrative than “yet another Daptone instrumental funk album,” but that latter tagline is trustworthy for a reason. The label’s house sound isn’t borne out of try-hard duplication as much as a finely tuned cast; Pazner has exemplified that approach and added some flair with a string section and his own ear. A few years ago the Daptone co-founder and engineer Gabriel Roth fessed up to a studio secret in an interview with the trade publication Sound On Sound. “The sound you want really is coming from the musicians,” he said. “And when guys have played together for a while it's not a strain to get a good sound.” Pazner knows this stay-out-of-the-way tactic well, and the Olympians make their toughest tricks sound effortless because of it.Since his last major-label release, 2015’s Dreams Worth More Than Money, Meek Mill has been anything but silent. He put out a two-part EP (4/4), and fired up an assortment of beefs with Drake, the Game, Joe Budden, and 50 Cent. The largest course, of course, was with Drake, a Mean Girls meme-war that left Meek’s credibility so pummeled that fast-food chains felt safe enough to roast him. Even his MMG Boss Rick Ross distanced himself from his once proud protege (“I never took an L back when Meek fell…”). If nothing else, his next LP would be his best chance to define the next chapter in his story.But that LP, DC4, inspires more questions than answers. It’s ostensibly a mixtape, but it’s for sale on iTunes, suggesting the samples were cleared. Conceptually, it’s the fourth in his Dreamchasers series, a concept that defines both his side ventures and his identity. Meek’s struggle is quintessentially American. With the deck stacked against him from day one, his American Dream was laser-focused on climbing out of the South Philadelphia ghetto that claimed his father’s life. His Philly heroes in the State Property crew rapped as tough as they looked, and his hip-hop education played out on street cornersHe brings that energy to every one of his songs, and DC4 is no different. Taking a cue from Nas & Puffy, he starts off with nothing less dramatic than the “O Fortuna”-sampling “On the Regular,” produced by Lex Luger protege MP808. The opening bars serve as a prologue for the rest of the record, listing the things he will rap about: selling dope, going to court, wearing jewelry, drinking alcohol, having sex, smoking high-quality marijuana. Or as he puts it, “Stickin’ to the basics.” And if there’s a knock on Meek, it’s just that—he’s basic. Struggle rappers are constantly underestimated, dropping countless releases, scrapping for every ounce of recognition they can get. After more than a dozen releases, Meek Mill is really just a struggle rapper that made it. If he started from the bottom, now that he’s here, what else does he have to say?Not much, it turns out. Meek’s beat selection has always been impressive, especially considering his prolific output. And DC4 may have benefitted further from the relatively delayed release; The track list is loaded from top to bottom with bangers from young producers such as Sound M.O.B. (“Litty”) and the 808 Mafia. The features are a good indication of the sound he’s adopted, with guest appearances from Lil Uzi Vert, Young Thug, 21 Savage, and Migos’ Quavo. He takes a welcome left turn with the blues-guitar driven “Blue Notes,” built off a Snowy White sample, and puts on up-and-coming R&B crooner Guordan Banks with the Pusha T-featuring “Two Wrongs.”But when it comes to his rhymes, there’s little variety in his style. No matter the tone or mood of the beat he’s rhyming over, his rhymes are yelled rather than rapped. He’s 2016’s version of Bad Boy’s “Madd Rapper”—mad cuz he’s not getting enough “Shine,” mad cuz he didn’t get a tweet from the game’s biggest star. His energy at shows, honed from years of street-corner battles, is infectious. But on record, with his volume always cranked to 10, it really only works in small doses. And while he’s capable of detail-rich narratives, he never manages to focus on any one thought long enough to say anything of substance. Even the serial story of “Tony Story 3” is mired in hoary gangsta tropes.On DC4, Meek Mill is caught between his old life and his new one. His history with actual “gangsta shit” may have boosted his credibility—and profile—but now, it seems to be holding him back. He’s still prone to the occasional exhibition of garden-variety homophobia, but at least since he’s been in a relationship with Nicki Minaj, there’s been a noticeable reduction in misogyny. He almost certainly would love to graduate from his tough-guy street persona, but it’s as if he feels his core audience won’t let him. “You can't be hard all the time, man,” he told Billboard in an interview last year. “There's both sides to everything. What's wrong with it? Jay Z was a street rapper and he had a girlfriend.”He’s clearly thinking about how these pieces of his life fit into the larger struggle, but DC4 merely hints at powerful, ugly truths. The album’s cover is a collage of court documents (including his plea agreement) and a mug shot of an 18-year-old Meek, his face bandaged and eye swollen after a beat down from black cops. But he went harder on Funkmaster Flex’s Hot 97 show than he does on record, eloquently questioning the morality of the prison system and Flint’s poisoned water. Time will tell if Meek’s legacy outlasts the embarrassing Drake episode, as the only questions DC4 has answered are related to how he’d like his famous friends to promote his new record. But as an MC, Meek’s considerable potential remains untapped.Freedom Jazz Dance, the latest volume in Columbia Legacy’s Miles Davis Bootleg Series, opens with a discussion. It’s October 24, 1966, and Miles and bassist Ron Carter are working out a bass line until Miles interrupts and scolds him gently: “No,” Miles rasps, “that’s too common. C’mon.” Carter at one point says, “I don’t understand.” Miles continues on, “Play E diminished…start with a B flat,” and finally, to producer Teo Macero in the control room, he says, as he does again and again on this set, “Play that, Teo.”After eleven takes—and twenty-three minutes of talk, rehearsal, and some ball-breaking—Miles, along with Carter, saxophonist Wayne Shorter, pianist Herbie Hancock, and drummer Tony Williams (famously known as the “Second Great Quintet”), embark on the master of Eddie Harris’ soul-jazz number “Freedom Jazz Dance” that would appear the following year on the album Miles Smiles. In fact, each of the six tracks on Miles Smiles are broken down, pored over, and built back up by the musicians and the producers of this set (Steve Berkowitz, Michael Cuscuna, and Richard Seidel), who have unearthed outtakes, false starts, and, for the first time, studio dialogue. Virtually two-thirds of this three-CD set is the making of—and love letter to—his 1967 album Miles Smiles, one of his finest works that’s often overlooked in “best-of” Miles shortlists. The rest of Freedom Jazz Dance includes reels of material that would later appear on Nefertiti and Water Babies. The alternate takes and the lively banter plop you right there in the studio as the artistic process unfolds. It’s what differentiates Freedom Jazz Dance from past volumes of this enthralling series, which were all live concerts that showed how Miles’s groups evolved on the bandstand. Here the studio is the laboratory—and what a studio, the storied 30th Street Studio, a converted Armenian Evangelical Church between Second and Third Avenue, where Kind of Blue was recorded seven years earlier. Though compared to what the new quintet was up to by 1966, Kind of Blue sounds almost quaint.The dialogue on this set is often profane (“That was a motherfucker!”; “Don’t sit up there giggling, cocksucker!”); sometimes tedious (“Wayne, what’s happening? You want a drink? Want a hamburger?”); but usually mineral-rich. “Hey Wayne,” Miles says, this time in his brownstone on West 77th Street, “I was thinking about writing a blues…like in F and then going to A-flat, you know?” before he tinkers with the idea on an electric piano. During a take of “Orbits,” he says, “Don’t rush it, Tony.” On “Gingerbread Boy”: “Herbie, don’t play chords on your left hand, just your right hand.” Miles is nurturing, but very much the boss. While working through “Dolores,” he says to Herbie, “Don’t play nothin’ until you’re ready to play,” to which Hancock answers, “You don’t want that thing in there? I thought it was cute.” Miles says, “I don’t."One could argue that this volume is superfluous (“Give Wayne half of that hamburger, Bobby”). New listeners to jazz or to Miles Davis particularly might be disoriented, especially if they don’t recognize the voices of the band members or understand the significance of Teo Macero. (“Teee-o? Teee-o?” “I need moral support Teo—immoral.”) For the uninitiated, Miles Smiles, Nefertiti, and The Bootleg Series, Vol. I are almost certainly better places to start.Who knows how Miles Davis himself would even feel about this. Would he want the outtakes included? The banter? In his 1989 autobiography, he wrote of these years: “I made six studio dates with this group in four years….We recorded much more than what was released….And there were some live recordings that I guess Columbia will release when they think they can make the most money—probably after I’m dead.” But one could also argue the exact opposite, that this set is found treasure, especially to Miles completists, enthusiasts, musicians, and students. The producers don’t take jazz or Miles Davis fans lightly, or as ATMs. This documentation underscores the artistic process of one of American music’s most seminal bands. You can hear how the Wayne Shorter-penned “Footprints,” maybe the highlight of Miles Smiles, went from a slower tempo to the perfectly paced, ethereal master take. Or Tony Williams, just 20 in October 1966, go from great to spectacular by the session-reel outtake of “Nefertiti” eight months later. He’s equally mesmerizing on a rhythm section rehearsal of “Country Son,” as is Carter.It’s been a big year for Miles Davis. In April, there was Don Cheadle’s biopic Miles Ahead, accompanied by Robert Glasper’s original score and his additional tribute album Everything’s Beautiful, which included Erykah Badu, Laura Mvula, and Bilal; Prestige reissued a box set of his early 1950s recordings on 10-inch vinyl; he has a presence in the brand new National Museum of African American History and Culture. May would have been his 90th birthday; September marked 25 years since he passed. Even a Scotch whiskey called Kind of Blue, in honor of Miles, launched in August.If there’s a drawback to the ongoing releases and reissues from Miles Davis, it’s that it can steer attention away from jazz musicians on the vibrant scene today. Not that they shouldn’t welcome it; there will always be a lot to glean from Miles’ canon. And there will likely still be more finds from his Columbia vaults; his early-mid 1980s’ work, for instance, hasn’t been sifted through yet. That’s a good thing. There will always be something to look back —and forward—to.Leipzig's Gunnar Wendel, better known as Kassem Mosse, has built up a tidy reputation as one of leftfield dance music's most respected figures while keeping his person completely out of the equation. Despite using a number of aliases—KMOS, Paid Reach, Seltene Erden, the Siege of Troy—Wendel has never made an effort to stay anonymous, exactly. He's never cultivated mystique, never used his aliases as a shield. (That might precisely be the reason he's been spared the scrutiny that Burial's William Bevan has faced.) He sits for the occasional interview, though there doesn't seem to have been a new one in English in five years, and speaks thoughtfully and in great detail about his processes and his philosophy. He even maintains a Facebook page. Yet he's clearly content to remain at arm's length from contemporary dance music culture. He prefers living in Leipzig to joining the crowded techno scene in Berlin, and it makes sense; music like his requires a certain measure of isolation.Even at its most straightforward, there's always been an element of mystery in Wendel's work. Loping house grooves may trundle ahead at 120 BPM—he's no stranger to the floor-filling anthem—but the background swims with wraithlike shapes, with creaks and clanks. Figuring out how a given track may have been made is largely guesswork, and largely irrelevant, too. The elements in his music seem less a matter of intention than tidal happenstance, like barnacle-studded scraps of plastic washed up on the beach after a storm.Wendel used to specialize in beaten-up and broken-down house, favoring figures suggestive of a note hastily scribbled in the dark—the torn scrap of crumpled paper bag smoothed flat against the knee of someone's Levi's, the ballpoint pen poking halfway through the rough, pulpy edge—yet still legible as dance music. But he has increasingly abandoned dancefloor conventions as he has moved further out. On Disclosure, his first album for London's Honest Jon's label, and his first long-form studio output since 2014's Workshop 19, he might be mistaken for an entirely different artist than the one who produced warm, bittersweet tunes like “578” and “Thalassocalyce.”The album covers plenty of ground, from his typical slow-motion house ruminations to tumbling, footwork-tempo dynamos, but nearly half the album's tracks are thorny synthesizer sketches—fistfuls of gurgle and ping, sometimes beatless, sometimes accompanied by tangled drum-machine patterns that tie the math-processing parts of the cortex up in knots. The opening “Stepping on Salt” gives us an idea of the kinds of tones to expect: sizzling, squelching analog waveforms yoked to broken-clock arpeggios over which the spirits of Daphne Oram and Delia Derbyshire loom large.Even the most overtly rhythmic cuts here warily skirt the edges of the dancefloor. “Phoenicia Wireless” is the kind of pensive, toe-scuffing house track that Wendel can probably crank out in his sleep, but the beat doesn't start up in earnest until nearly two-thirds of the way through, and it's forever on the verge of being swallowed up by hi-hat bursts that clatter like mid-century newsroom typewriters. Woe to the careless DJ who throws on “Aluminosilicate Mirrors” without taking a good, hard listen first: A few minutes in, the tempo starts drifting upward without warning, turning the frenetic footwork groove even more hair-raising.“Collapsing Dual Core” is one of the album's fastest, most unencumbered cuts, playing contrapuntal synthesizer lines against a TR-707 programming, and there's no arrangement to speak of, just a ceaseless series of tweaks to a few fixed patterns—a live jam par excellence. It tells you a lot about Wendel's method. Many musicians might have used what he's assembled here as the building blocks for something more finessed; they might have added more elements, woven emotive samples into the mix, teased out a harmony or two. Not Wendel: What you hear is what you get, and even the spindliest, most skeletal jam is exactly that and nothing more. It has no interest in meeting you halfway.And that's one of the things that's so weirdly satisfying about Disclosure: It feels honest, and it feels true to the standards that Wendel has set for himself throughout his career. For all its quirks and austerity, Disclosure doesn't feel like the work of someone who's being intentionally difficult. He's simply following his own path. The rest of us are free to follow if we wish.The Dillinger Escape Plan’s blend of extreme harshness and technicality had a seismic impact on the metal and hardcore underground with the release of their 1999 full-length debut Calculating Infinity. Not unlike those ’90s-era hidden-image 3D posters, the New Jersey quintet’s transfiguration of progressive metal influences like Meshuggah, Carcass, Human Remains, and Deadguy required a cognitive shift to recognize the detail and structural complexity under all the noise. From that point on, DEP have shown a hunger for pushing boundaries while attempting to stay true to their essence.Every post-Calculating Dillinger Escape Plan album has contained head-scratching deviations from the original sound, something founding guitarist Ben Weinman and the original lineup once defined so clearly. By their last two albums, Option Paralysis and One of Us Is the Killer, the band had settled into marrying their signature mathcore style with high concentrations of melody and mid-tempo groove. As capably as they had found a middle ground, those albums pointed to a holding pattern. Dissociation, the band’s sixth and final album, touches often on the now-familiar template of pounding, grindcore-level noise flurries that once shook the world. Of course, Dillinger Escape Plan take sharp turns away from that template as well—often in the same song.Dissociation hits its stride when the band grafts new elements onto its classic sound—something that, for all their chops, hasn’t been easy to pull off in the past. In one four-song stretch, Dillinger Escape Plan stride across a variety of styles as confidently as the one they invented. “Fugue,” the first of those four tracks, tastefully emulates Squarepusher’s hyper-busy brand of synthetic future jazz before opening up into a vista of delicate, gloomy ambiance. “Fugue” makes you wish that Dillinger Escape Plan did a few more Aphex Twin covers or collaborate on a split with Squarepusher. It’s the first of several reminders that they are leaving some untapped potential on the table as they close out their career. On “Low Feels Blvd,” DEP’s familiar spazz-out crunch morphs into a grand jazz fusion section that you’d otherwise mistake for a Pat Metheny or John McLaughlin record. Not since Candiria’s heyday have extreme metal and jazz sounded like they belong together—a huge achievement for a band that built its reputation on sheer angularity. The song also stands out for how much vocalist Greg Puciato sounds genuinely unhinged. When Puciatio replaced original frontman Dimitri Minakakis in time for 2004’s sophomore full-length Miss Machine, he immediately increased the band’s threshold for melody, but he had to wait until after the Mike Patton collaboration EP Irony Is a Dead Scene to show the world his range. Unfairly or not, Puciato will continue to draw comparisons to Patton, especially on songs like “Surrogate,” where Dillinger scrapes close to Mr. Bungle/Faith No More’s bastardizations of Broadway-esque schmaltz.Nevertheless, “Surrogate” demonstrates how, somewhere along the way, Dillinger learned how to stop stacking changes in its songs just for effect. As “Surrogate” rolls from one style to the next—grindcore, a crashing downtempo section, film noir—the mood shifts convincingly as well. Where Dillinger once tossed styles around as if changing costumes, now they actually get into character. In flashes, the band still comes up with fresh sounds. “Honeysuckle,” for example, adopts a Latin-flavored grind as though Latin music had originated from some extra-terrestrial psychology.One of the things that made early DEP music so compelling was the way it conveyed the horrific malaise lurking behind the generic monoculture of the band’s native New Jersey suburbs—a sound so ugly grown out of a soulless environment. Now, the Dillinger Escape Plan aren’t anchored in a time or place, but that isn’t something the band has any control over. It’s a blessing and a curse that they will be forever synonymous with a particular period in hardcore and metal history. In subtle ways, Dissociation reminds us that the band hung in there long after the world could have passed it by.Out of all the fascinating alternate takes, B-sides, rare compilation-only tracks and never-before-released sketches that comprise this expanded reissue of Public Image Ltd’s post-punk landmark, it’s a live version of “Public Image”  that is the real revelation. Part of an impromptu June 1979 concert in Manchester, the song keeps collapsing and restarting. “Shut up!” snaps John Lydon, responding  to audience jeers. “I told you it’s a fucking rehearsal.” Another PiL member explains that the drummer, Richard Dudanski, only joined three days ago. PiL relaunch the song only for Lydon to halt it with “Miles too fast!” The jeers erupt again and the singer offers a sort of defiant apology: if the crowd really wanted to “see mega light displays and all that shit,” they should go watch properly professional bands who put on a slick show. “But we ain’t like that... We’re extremely honest: sorry about that... We admit our mistakes.”This performance—an inadvertent deconstruction of performance itself—takes us to the heart of the PiL project as well as the post-punk movement for which the group served as figureheads. At its core was a belief in radical honesty: faith in the expressive power of words, singing and sound as vehicles for urgent communication. After the Sex Pistols’ implosion, Lydon was trying to find a way to be a public figure again without masks, barriers, routines, or constraining expectations. So it’s especially apt that “Public Image”—PiL’s debut single, Lydon’s post-Pistols mission-statement—is the song that  fell apart at Manchester’s Factory Club. “Public Image” is about the way a stage persona can become a lie that a performer is forced to live out in perpetuity. Lydon sings about “Johnny Rotten” as a theatrical role that trapped him and which he’s now casting off. Starting all over with his given name and a new set of musical accomplices, Lydon was determined to stay true to himself. The group’s name came from Muriel Sparks’ novel The Public Image, about a movie actress whose career is ruined but who, the ending hints, is freed to embark on an authentic post-fame existence. Lydon added the “limited” to signify both the idea of the rock group as a corporation (in the business of image-construction) and the idea of keeping egos on a tight leash. A comparison for Lydon’s search for a new true music—and a truly new music—that would leave behind rock’s calcified conventions is Berlin-era Bowie’s quest for a “new music night and day” (the working title of Low). Indeed it was Virgin Records’ belief that Lydon was the most significant British rock artist since Bowie that caused them to extend PiL such extraordinary license and largesse when it came to recording in expensive studios. That indulgence enabled the recording of three of the most out-there albums ever released by a major label: First Issue, Metal Box, Flowers of Romance. But it’s the middle panel of the triptych that is the colossal achievement:  a near-perfect record that reinvents and renews rock in a manner that fulfilled post-punk’s promise(s) to a degree rivaled only by Joy Division on Closer.The key word, though, is reinvention. Lydon talked grandly of abandoning rock altogether,  arguing that killing off the genre had been the true point of punk. But unlike the absolutely experimental (and as with many such experiments, largely unsuccessful) Flowers of Romance, Metal Box doesn’t go beyond rock so much as stretch it to its furthest extent, in the manner of the Stooges’ Fun House or Can’s Tago Mago. It’s a forbidding listen, for sure, but only because of its intensity, not because it’s abstract or structurally convoluted. The format is classic: guitar-bass-drums-voice (augmented intermittently by keyboards and electronics). The rhythm section (Jah Wobble and a succession of drummers) is hypnotically steady and physically potent. The guitarist (Keith Levene) is a veritable axe-hero, as schooled and as spectacular as any of the pre-punk greats. And the singer, while unorthodox and edging off-key, pours it all out in a searing catharsis that recalls nothing so much as solo John Lennon and the intersection he found between the deeply personal and the politically universal. There are even a few tunes here! But yes, it’s a bracing listen, Metal Box, and nowhere more so than on the opening dirge “Albatross.” 11 minutes-long, leaden in tempo, the song is clearly designed as a test for the listener just like the protracted assault of “Theme” that launched First Issue had been. Absolutely pitiless music—Levene hacking at his axe like an abattoir worker, Wobble rolling out a looped tremor of a bassline—is matched with utterly piteous singing: Lydon intones accusations about an oppressive figure from his past, perhaps the master-manipulator McLaren, possibly his dead friend Vicious, conceivably “Johnny Rotten” himself as a burden he can’t shake. “Memories,” the single that preceded Metal Box’s November ’79 release, is more sprightly. Like “Albatross,” though, the song is an embittered exorcism: Lydon could almost be commenting on his own nagging vocal and fixated lyrics with the line “dragging on and on and on and on and on and on and ON,” then spits out “This person’s had enough of useless memories” over a breath-taking disco-style breakdown. With “Swan Lake,” a retitled remix of the single “Death Disco,” Lydon is possessed by an unbearable memory that he doesn’t want to forget: the sight of his mother dying in slow agony from cancer.  If the wretched grief of the lyrics—“Silence in her eyes,” “Final in a fade,” “Choking on a bed/Flowers rotting dead”—recalls Lennon’s “Mother,” the retching anguish of Lydon’s vocal resembles Yoko Ono at her most abrasively unleashed. On the original vinyl, the song locks into an endless loop on the phrase “words cannot express.” But “Swan Lake”—named after the Tchaikovsky melody that Levene intermittently mutilates—is nothing if not a 20th Century expressionist masterpiece: the missing link between Munch’s “The Scream” and Black Flag’s “Damaged I.”Just as placing “death” in front of “disco” was an attempt to subvert the idea of dancefloor escapism, the title “Poptones” drips with acrid irony. A real-life news story of abduction, rape and escape inspired the lyric, with one detail in particular triggering Lydon’s imagination: the victim’s memory of the bouncy music streaming out of the car’s cassette player. This juxtaposition of  manufactured happiness and absolute horror is a typically post-punk move, exposing pop as a prettified lie that masks reality’s raw awfulness: for some post-punk groups,  an existential condition (dread, doubt) and for others, a political matter (exploitation, control). On “Poptones” this truth-telling impulse produces one of Lydon’s most vivid lyrics (“I don’t like hiding in this foliage and peat/It’s wet and I’m losing my body heat”), supported and surrounded by music that’s surprisingly pretty, in an eerie, insidious sort of way. Wobble’s sinuously winding bass weaves through Levene’s cascading sparks as well as the cymbal-smash spray he also supplies (PiL being temporarily drummerless during this stage of the album’s spasmodic recording). With PiL still between drummers, on “Careering” it’s Wobble who doubles up roles, pummeling your ribcage with his bass and bashing the kit like a metalworker pounding flat a sheet of steel. Levene swaps guitar for smears of synth, while Lydon’s helicopter vision scans the border zone between Ulster and the Irish Republic: a terrorscape of “blown into breeze” bomb victims and paramilitary paranoia. “Careering” sounds like nothing else in rock and nothing else in PiL’s work—as with several other songs on Metal Box, it could have spawned a whole identity, an entire career, for any other band. “No Birds Do Sing,” unbelievably, surpasses the preceding five songs. Levene cloaks the murderous Wobble-Dudanksi groove with a toxic cloud of guitar texture. Lydon surveys an English suburban scene whose placidity could not be further from troubled Northern Ireland, noting in sardonic approval its “bland planned idle luxury” and “well-intentioned rules” (rolling the ‘r’ there in a delicious throwback to classic Rotten-style singing). For “a layered mass of subtle props” and “a caviar of silent dignity” alone, Lydon ought to have the 2026 Nobel locked down. After the greatest six-song run in all of post-punk, Metal Box’s remainder is merely (and mostly) excellent, moving from the juddery instrumental “Graveyard” (oddly redolent of Johnny Kidd and the Pirates’ early British rock‘n’roll classic “Shakin’ All Over”) through the rubbery bassline waddle of “The Suit” to the stampeding threat of “Chant,” a savage snapshot of 1979’s tribal street violence. The album winds down with the unexpected respite and repose of “Radio Four,” a tranquil instrumental entirely played by Levene: just a tremulously poignant and agile bass line overlaid with reedy keyboards that swell and subside. The title comes from the U.K.’s national public radio station, a civilized and calming source of news, views, drama and light comedy beamed out to the British middle classes. As with “Poptones,” the irony is astringent.  Listening to (and reviewing) Metal Box in a linear sequence goes against PiL’s original intent, of course. As the flatly descriptive, deliberately demystified title indicates, Metal Box initially came in the form of a circular canister containing three 45 r.p.m  12-inches—for better sound, but also to encourage listeners to play the record in any order they chose,  ideally listening to it in short bursts rather than in a single sitting.  But what once seemed radically anti-rockist (“deconstruct the Album!”) is now a historical footnote, because anyone listening to a CD or other digital format can rearrange the contents however they wish.  And if you do doggedly listen to Metal Box in accordance with its given running order, what comes across strongly now is its sheer accumulative power as an album. That in turn accentuates the feeling that this is a record that can be understood fairly easily by a fan of, say, Led Zeppelin. It works on the same terms as Zoso:  a thematically coherent suite of physically imposing rhythm, virtuoso guitar violence, and impassioned singing. Lydon would soon enough ‘fess up to his latent rockism on 1986’s hard-riffing Album (also reissued as a deluxe box set at this time) on which he collaborated with Old Wave musos like ex-Cream drummer Ginger Baker. That incarnation of PiL even performed Zep’s “Kashmir” in concert. Listening to Metal Box today, the studio processing—informed by PiL’s love of disco and dub—that felt so striking at the time seems subtle and relatively bare-bones compared to today. As the Manchester concert and some wonderfully vivid live-in-the-studio versions from the BBC rock program “The Old Grey Whistle Test” prove, PiL could recreate this music onstage (despite that fumbled “Public Image”).  Levene, especially, was surprisingly exact when it came to reproducing the guitar parts and textures captured in the studio. Even the band’s debts to reggae and funk can be seen now as a continuation of the passion for black music that underpinned the British rock achievement of the ’60s and first-half of the ’70s—that perennial impulse to embrace the formal advances made by R&B and complicate them further while adding Brit-bohemian concerns as subject matter. If PiL’s immediate neighbors are the Pop Group and the Slits, you could also slot them alongside the Police: great drummer(s), roots-feel bass, inventively textured guitar, a secret prog element (Levene loved Yes, Lydon adored Peter Hammill) and an emotional basis in reggae’s yearnings and spiritual aches. Metal Box is a landmark, for sure. But like Devils Tower, the mountain in Close Encounters of the Third Kind, it’s an oddly isolated one. In marked contrast to Joy Division, PiL’s spawn was neither legion nor particularly impressive (apart from San Francisco’s wonderful Flipper). Nor would PiL’s core three ever come close to matching the album’s heights in their subsequent careering (Wobble being the most productive, in both copiousness and quality). I was apprehensive about listening to this album again, fearing that it had faded or dated. But this music still sounds new and still sounds true to me: as adventurous and as harrowingly heart-bare as it did when I danced in the dark to it, an unhappy 16-year-old. Metal Box stands up. It stands for all time. From 1999 to 2013, the American Wrestlers front man Gary McClure played guitar in the English shoegaze group Working for a Nuclear Free City. Despite being signed to the relatively small label Melodic Records (which just celebrated its 100th release in 2015), the band had big ideas and an even bigger sound—big enough, in fact, to land them a video game contract with Sony: they wrote “Silent Melody” for Infamous. Their dexterous, almost chameleon-like style stemmed from influences as disparate as Bill Evans and the Grateful Dead, and it managed to be psychedelic without sounding dated or hokey. Eventually, as band members began to focus more and more on solo projects, McClure took his omnivorous songwriting spirit elsewhere. He moved to St. Louis to marry Bridgette Imperial, and together they formed the core of American Wrestlers, whose self-titled 2015 debut was a similar grab-bag of musical influence. With Goodbye Terrible Youth, however, McClure seems to be turning his searchlight inward. The six-minute bedroom-rock epics from the 2015 album are absent here, as are the eight-track Tascam recorders they used to record it. The obvious shadow of other artists has faded, and what’s left here is an aging musician looking through himself to create something new out of the old. After all, the album’s main subject is described in its title: terrible youth. McClure isn’t shy about his memory. He doesn’t wince when he looks back. These are unabashedly personal and reflective songs, often filled with regret and loss, ugliness and shame. But, as McClure boldly sings on “Hello, Dear,” “Where goes youth, I go.”The album begins with “Vote Thatcher,” a death-obsessed track that speaks to a familiar theme for McClure: brutal policing. “I can always look to my son,” he sings, “to be stoned by policemen.” “Kelly,” the sixth track on 2015’s American Wrestlers, is also about police brutality, particularly the death of Kelly Thomas, a 37-year-old homeless man who was beaten into a coma by six police officers in 2011. It seems like a strange thing to begin an album about youth and memory with a song about modern policing, but there’s more to it. “My life for your throne,” McClure mourns on “Thatcher,” “I still can’t believe you died.” The words echo over a haunting synth melody. What is he bargaining for? Who is he bargaining with? We don’t get an answer. And as much as the album is about McClure’s own experience growing up, it’s also about the people who don’t live beyond youth. In this way, the music reflects both promise and tragedy in equal parts.Heavy guitar distortion—a staple in McClure’s work—colors over many of the songs on Terrible Youth. In “Give Up,” the album’s lead single, the constant buzz of rhythm guitar wins out over a catchy riff. “Amazing Grace,” a beautiful track about surrendering to happiness when the sun comes “bright across the rooftops,” bathes in a gentle hum, almost like sunshine itself. McClure’s use of distortion doesn’t evince ecstasy like it does for the Japandroids, nor does it mimic playfulness like it does for Youth Lagoon.  The distortion here is something else, something distressing. “Metal moans will multiply,” McClure sings on “Terrible Youth,” “we’re death in motion.” If the “metal moans” behind the distortion represent anything, it’s the discomfort of remembering where we’ve been, and as McClure suggests, where we’re going. What holds Terrible Youth back from becoming a really coherent, powerful statement is a kind of haphazardness in its arrangement. McClure doesn’t write choruses, he writes contrition, and sometimes this makes it difficult to take hold of any single resounding emotion in the music. Songs like “So Long” and “Blind Kids” rely on chord changes, but it’s rare for those changes, those shifts of feeling, to build toward anything greater.  And beyond casting an ‘80s sheen over the album, synth rhythms and melodies aren’t given any other direction or purpose — they rev the engine without propelling the car.   Although the scattered nature of some of the songs keeps any single narrative from taking shape, the album is a significant improvement for a band that’s still coming into its own, still, in other words, in its youth. When the heartache of memory gets to be too much, American Wrestlers are there to show us, as McClure puts it best, that “All that weight/It could be but it’s make believe/And when it stops it’s nothing.”For the lead single of her second album, Tove Lo chose as inspiration one of the most-circulated and least-understood literary quotes of the past decade, the “Cool Girl” monologue from Gillian Flynn’s Gone Girl: “Men always say that as the defining compliment, don’t they? She’s a cool girl. Being the Cool Girl means I am a hot, brilliant, funny woman who adores football, poker, dirty jokes, and burping, who plays video games, drinks cheap beer, loves threesomes and anal sex, and jams hot dogs and hamburgers into her mouth like she’s hosting the world’s biggest culinary gang bang while somehow maintaining a size 2, because Cool Girls are above all hot. Hot and understanding. Cool Girls never get angry; they only smile in a chagrined, loving manner and let their men do whatever they want. Go ahead, shit on me, I don’t mind, I’m the Cool Girl.” People circulating this quote almost always leave out the fact that the woman delivering this soliloquy is a psychopath who will go on to rack up a body count. But why they circulate it is more telling: that in her misanthropy she’s elucidated something very real about relationships, and very bleak.Tove Lo knows a bit about bleakness and misunderstanding; she’s courted both from her first single. The bluntness of “Habits (Stay High)” ensured it’d cut through the crowd of anodyne rising pop stars but also ensured that for the next year Lo would field interviews about whether she actually lurked in sex clubs and picked up daddies on the playground. As a student of confessionalism, she knows audiences have an endless appetite for scandalous female writers, from Mary McCarthy to Cat Marnell to Fiona Apple to Britney Spears, and that they crave their honesty less than they do their imagined autobiographies, their self-destruction and bare flayed skin. As a student of pop, she knows that her industry parses women's vulnerability as empowerment, their pain as sexiness, their point as pop as usual. Lo certainly leaves herself open to misinterpretation—her Sticky Fingers-via-creepshot album art, her music’s endlessly quotable debauchery. Perhaps knowing this, she practically spells Lady Wood out: putting an explanatory interlude in the outro of “Imaginary Friend” (“I don’t know... I guess it’s kind of like a voice in my heart reminding me that there's nothing to fear”), all but defining “lady wood” on the title track, or addressing the audience on “Cool Girl”: “Now you can’t tell if I’m really ironic,” Lo sings, absolutely correctly.“Cool Girl” is equally a pop song, a delivery device for a sassy, stuttery chorus about being a cool girl. It's the line all smart music walks, and Lady Wood walks at album length. The album’s a showcase for Wolf Cousins, the Max Martin-affiliated songwriting collective that includes Lo and nearly a dozen others, including Swedish writer Ilya Salmanzadeh, Iranian producer Ali Payami and production duo the Struts. They’ve written about half the charts, but Lady Wood is as concentrated an outlet for their sound as you’ll find. But it’s equally a platform for Lo to argue, as she did on Queen of the Clouds, that the self-destructive affairs of a particular sort of woman are a subject worthy of four-part concept albums. Lady Wood is the first two parts: the high and the comedown, the party and the afterparty. The structural resemblance to the Weeknd’s EPs isn’t accidental. When Abel Tesfaye worked with the Scandinavian claque he became Lo’s direct colleague, and the debauched tableaux and nervous vocal tics of tracks like “Don’t Talk About It” and “Keep It Simple” sound almost tailor-written for him. The sound is basically the same, too: nocturnal, minor-key synthpop, less suited to dancing with tears in your eyes than waking up alone and disheveled the morning after. It’s the same sound the Wolves have worked for over a year, but in Tove as in Abel they’ve found an ideal collaborator, one who goes as dark as they do. For the most part, Lady Wood abandons the shock value of its predecessor; the title track and a couple nods to being “under the influence” are about as explicit as things get. But her ruminations and obsessions are the same: the fleeting freedom found in bad behavior; the compulsion of her women to tamp down their desires and their inability to do so; envy of the men in her misadventures, who have it easy. It’d be easy to play this as melodrama, but Lo sings most of the album without affect, so when she does emote, it counts for more: sneaking cutesy Betty Boop inflections into the backing vocals of “Cool Girl”'s chorus, belting into the void on the ballads, exclaiming “I’m gonna get hurt!” like it’s her deepest desire. That's on standout “True Disaster,” which begins as Marr-like feedback haze and turns into one of the year's best pop songs, a perfectly wrought instrument of self-laceration. (The effect’s somewhat ruined when the titular disaster reveals himself two songs later as mealy-voiced Joe Janiak, who barely sounds capable of manipulating a coffee machine, let alone a woman. This is why “True Disaster” should be a single.)That said, “True Disaster” isn't a perfect pop song. It suffers from Tove Lo’s primary weakness as a songwriter: her compulsion, at least once per track, to include a line that her Scandinavian colleagues might call “juicy” but that comes off more like a brand saying bae. At least on a track called “Lady Wood” you know what you're getting, but nothing about “True Disaster” prepares you for the line “I can't hide my feels.” Even the tracks free of such nonsense are so unrelentingly bleak and so professionally done that, at album length, they become interchangeable well-produced malaise. Yet when Lady Wood tries to go upbeat—as on “Imaginary Friend” and “WTF Love Is”—the resulting tracks are the weakest by far. The bridge to “Cool Girl” is designed to be the emotional core of the whole album, the moment Lo lets her guard down and reveals her true desires, but it just sounds like she’s emulating Sia. Proportionally, these are trivial complaints. Lady Wood is short, but Lo finds ample darkness to plumb. “Don’t Talk About It” recasts the girl squads so ubiquitous in pop culture as nihilistic cliques hazing each other into empty highs and dead-eyed selfies. “Flashes” does the same without the squad, Lo lamenting the effect on friends back home of so much mining her life for content: “When I fuck things up in front of camera flashes, what about you?” “Vibes” is deceptively chill, the supposedly lighthearted flirting of two parties with nothing between them but contempt. “What's your line, though?... Heard that before,” Lo teases, only to be negged down by Janiak. And “Keep It Simple”—befitting the title, just Lo and Cousins standout Payami—presents a scenario both hyper-specific and likely relatable: lying in bed with a rebound at some garbage hour of the night, flipping through an ex’s old sexts, feeling nothing. Payami’s synths land fast and loud like thunderclaps, and Lo pushes any impending connection or intimacy back into the dark. Then she pulls herself together for the drop, the cool girl once more.You don’t come to one of Steve Hauschildt’s records expecting, or even hoping, to be surprised. The Cleveland electronic musician's consistency is one of his great strengths: His synthesizers ripple like a mountain stream at peak snowmelt, and his frictionless pulses represent only the finest qualities of electricity itself. They feel like dreams of a coal- and hydraulic-free future, when mammoth wind turbines and sparkling solar arrays offer the promise of a guilt-free grid.That’s not to say Hauschildt’s sounds or techniques are necessarily very original; he makes no attempt to disguise his debt to artists like Klaus Schulze, Edgar Froese, and Manuel Göttsching. But, much as his former band Emeralds did, he has succeeded in taking those influences and spinning them into a fusion that is his alone. Over the course of several albums for Kranky and a handful of CDR and cassette releases, he has channeled those spinning arpeggios into an unmistakable signature.Throughout his solo career, Hauschildt has signaled his disinterest in strictly repeating himself—thus the Vocoder and new wave experiments of Sequitur, and the occasional detour into ambient techno on Where All Is Fled. But it’s worth bearing in mind that Emeralds’ breakup, whatever its ultimate causes, was presaged by the radical shift in sound they took with their final album, 2012’s Just to Feel Anything. And what keeps many listeners coming back to Hauschildt’s records is precisely the promise that each album will sound practically interchangeable with the one that came before—just, perhaps, marginally better.On both of those counts, Strands succeeds, yet it also marks a shift in tone: At just eight tracks and 43 minutes long, it is noticeably more restrained. A few songs could have come from any of his earlier albums: “Same River Twice,” whose title goes to the heart of Hauschildt’s approach, unleashes a dizzying moiré of overlapping pulses—eighth notes, 16th notes, 32nd notes, all spinning like pinwheels whose tips are fixed with tinier pinwheels ad infinitum. But five tracks feature no arpeggios at all, which, given Hauschildt’s previous work, is a little like imagining a Four Tet record with no samples, or an Aphex Twin record with no drum machines.“Transience of Earthly Joys,” in which piano and pipe organ transmute into feedback-ripped synth squalls, has a quiet, blurry calm that's reminiscent of the most ambient moments on Cocteau Twins and Harold Budd’s The Moon and the Melodies. The rich, augmented chords and faintly detuned oscillator voices of “A False Seeming” and the slow, string-like passages of “Time We Have” also recall the The Moon and the Melodies, along with another 4AD album of a similar vintage: Michael Brook and Pieter Nooten’s 1987 album Sleeps With the Fishes, which framed melancholy pop melodies in velvety synthesizers and echoing guitar. In its slowest moments, Hauschildt’s album exudes the same sort of narcotic bliss. At points, it barely resists tipping into the maudlin, but that resistance, that willingness to inch right up to the edge of bathos without falling into it, is part of what makes it so captivating.It’s a bold move, slowing down like he has here. But by taking the emphasis off of rhythm, he allows us to focus instead on the texture of the sounds themselves. His patches are so physical—rasping, buzzing, peeling off like metal shavings—that you can imagine holding them in your hand. They feel like direct extensions of the silicon in the machines that produced them, like the transfiguration of sand into sound.Over the course of Lambchop’s two decade-plus career, they have been remarkably consistent. Even with their various lineup shifts, there have never been any tumultuous breakups, no big reunions, no major controversies. Any of their 12 studio releases could reasonably be your favorite. But while each of their albums sound unmistakably like Lambchop, no two of them sound quite alike; from the bouncy alt-country of Thriller, to the stark lounge folk of Is a Woman, through the sweetly orchestrated ballads of their last album, 2012’s excellent Mr. M. As a frontman, Kurt Wagner–with his inimitable baritone, like an agoraphobic Bill Callahan–has also shifted and stretched in his own quiet way. Sometimes he’ll greet you with a pre-coffee grumble; other times, he’s singing in the shower with a wispy falsetto. Like any good leading man, Wagner redefines himself for the role he’s playing, but he never lets you forget that he’s in control.So while FLOTUS, the band’s Vocoder-drenched, largely electronic new album, might initially feel like a shock, the reinvention is not entirely unprecedented. Last year saw the release of The Diet, an album by Lambchop side project HeCTA– featuring Wagner, as well as drummer Scott Martin and multi-instrumentalist Ryan Norris– that found Wagner singing his characteristic melodies over dance beats and au-courant synths (“You shouldn’t have to change a thing, except your mind,” he sang in the album’s highlight). Those ideas come into full bloom throughout the nearly-70 minute FLOTUS, though it’s less tentative and more seamless, with even Wagner’s vocals sounding like an instrument in the mix (this is not merely Lambchopped and Screwed). Like Bon Iver on 22, A Million, Lambchop exist here as a modern Americana act refusing their genre’s assumed aesthetics. But unlike the post-Yeezus cacophony of 22, A Million, FLOTUS is as lush and gorgeous as any of Lambchop’s past work, sometimes floating by with the luxurious chill of hotel lobby music, but never losing its sense of direction.With the majority of the album eschewing traditional song structure, the most immediate way to listen to FLOTUS is as a bridge between its twin epics: the opening “In Care of 8675309” and its closer, “The Hustle.” In Lambchop’s lineage of long, slow-burning album openers, “8675309” is their longest and their slowest-burning. It also serves as a smooth gateway into the band’s new sound, with Wagner’s heavily effected vocals–like the church organ setting on a cheap keyboard with the speakers muffled–rising from tentative opening notes to full-blown crooning by the end, accompanying one of the album’s best melodies. Wagner has cited both Kendrick Lamar and Shabazz Palaces as inspirations for his new direction, but a more fitting reference here might be Future, whose use of Auto-Tune is less ornamental and more foundational to his very cadence and word choice. As such, “8675309” is not merely a great Lambchop song with a weird vocal effect; it’s a great Lambchop song because of the weird vocal effect. “The Hustle,” on the other hand, arrives at the end of the record devoid of any vocal effects. Hearing Wagner’s untreated voice by that point makes it sound even more powerful and vulnerable. “I don’t want to leave you ever,” he opens, his voice warbling and reverberating all on its own, “And that’s a long, long time.” Over the course of its jazzy, stuttering 18 minutes, the song slides between movements, like Destroyer’s similar tour-de-force “Bay of Pigs,” before closing with the faint sound of piano. “It was raining like a movie/And it was hard to look away,” Wagner sings, a fitting metaphor for how captivating and uncanny but wholly natural the song feels.While none of the other tracks on the album are as immediate as “8675309” or as stunning as “The Hustle,” they each reveal their charms on repeated listens. The ones that focus on simple, repeated phrases–like “You are very remarkable” in “NIV” or “Take it on the chin” in “Directions to the Can”–become catchy in an effortless way. The less vocal-focused songs function as opportunities to appreciate the other members of the band. Tony Crow’s piano in “Howe” is as lyrical as any of Wagner’s appearances, and Matt Swanson’s bass in “Old Masters” slithers with soulful charisma. Every part of the record speaks to the greater whole, from the album cover (a close-up shot of Wagner’s wife, Mary Mancini, the Chairman of the Tennessee Democratic Party posing with Obama), to the title: both an acronym for “First Lady of the US” and, according to the liner notes, “For Love Often Turns Us Still,” a meditation on how simple things still render us speechless. “Given enough time, I can pretty much draw a correlation between any separate objects,” Wagner has said. The disparate pieces of this album play to that strength, unfolding like a long riddle.It’s to the band’s credit that FLOTUS exceeds its novelty. In a year when Springsteen, Bowie, and the creator of a hit Broadway musical have all cited Kendrick Lamar’s music as an inspiration, FLOTUS does not come entirely out of left field; it’s a solid, satisfying listen, devoid of context. Wagner’s lyrics are as cutting as ever (“See the flowers wilt/From the government they built/As the hammers wail/On a ship that hasn’t sailed”) and the band already sounds comfortable with their new sound, settling into a weightless groove that make you feel as if they’ve played this way forever. It’s one of Lambchop’s greatest strengths, that even when they’re overtly experimenting, they wear it as naturally as the garish pearls that have adorned their stage attire. “There’s that old saying about an artist having only one or two good ideas in his life and is doomed to repeat them,” Wagner recently said in an interview. “I reject that notion. I think I have maybe five.” What’s clear after listening to FLOTUS, is that he’s only getting started.Roman Flügel has released hundreds of tracks over the roughly quarter-century since he began putting out records, and in them he has explored many permutations of four-on-the-floor dance music: hard techno, acid trance, willfully lunkheaded electro-house, lyrical deep house. The Frankfurt native doesn't tend to stay in any one place for too long. On his 2014 album Happiness Is Happening he delved into glinting synth-pop and Krautrock's motorik chug; earlier this year, his Verschiebung EP explored polyrhythmic drum sounds as dry and scratchy as strep throat.Even within the context of that panoply of styles, All the Right Noises stands out as something we haven't heard from him before. The moods and sounds may be recognizable from his recent work, much of which has tilted toward contemplative states; glinting synthesizer patches transmit a pensive air, and the analog drum machines maintain a kind of stone-faced calm. But this is the furthest that Flügel has strayed from the dancefloor, at least for such an extended stretch.It isn't strictly an ambient album. “Warm and Dewy” plows ahead at a quick-stepping 130 beats per minute, battered by tablas and brandishing hi-hats that couldn't be sharper if they'd come straight from the J.A. Henckels factory. (This, too, is new territory for Flügel: The drums sound a lot like he's been listening to Shackleton’s classic Skull Disco fare, in fact). But four-on-the-floor beats are an exception rather than the norm, and even when they appear, they make a beeline away from the functionalist dictates of contemporary dance music. Following the gorgeous, clear-eyed ambient opener, “Fantasy,” “The Mighty Suns” drops us into a curious kind of middle ground: It's fast-paced, but it feels half-speed; the pulse nods to dub, yet the bright keys and faintly naïve melodies echo Kraftwerk. It sweeps you up in colliding waves of contrapuntal melodies, a sensation at once both relaxing and slightly unsettling: You're never quite sure in which direction it will move next.Rhythmically, the album peaks early, just three tracks in, with the polyrhythmic lurch of “Dead Idols.” Triplets snap against 4/4 rhythms, and an off-kilter clunk pulls the groove into a strange, elliptical shape; the first dozen times you hear it, you can practically feel your brain straining to parse the timekeeping. Shackleton's influence is audible here, too, along with the doomy menace of an artist like Demdike Stare, with wraithlike voices ratcheting up the tension as minor-key bleeps sound an ominous alarm. The rest of the album tackles far more soothing sounds: “Nameless Lake” harnesses the chirps and chimes of Amber-period Autechre; the elegant, strutting “Dust” reimagines Jean-Michel Jarre as downbeat acid; and the melancholy “Planet Zorg” is sad-sack ambient house with a hint of shoegaze thrown into the mix, sparking memories of Superpitcher remixing M83.But the most satisfying material here may be the simplest. “Believers” offers the merest hint of kalimba plucks spun through delay and the occasional piano chord. Very little happens, and captivatingly so. The same goes for the closing song, which at first listen might sound like a new age spa soundtrack, complete with electronic crickets deep in the mix. Listen closely, though, and you can hear Flügel's playful spirit at work in the song's richly expressive piano and restless synthesizer improvisations. He effortlessly squeezes so many ideas into its barely-there, four-minute frame, it's easy to wish he'd settle in and record an entire album of such quietly masterful pastoral mood-setting.As one-half of Single Minded Pros alongside Doc West, the Chicago-bred, now Brooklyn-based beatmaker DJ Rude One compiled a Rolodex of ’90s rap gods with his production work. The intro to new solo effort ONEderful lays out his credentials by assembling shout-outs from guys like Kool G Rap, DJ Premier, even DOOM (via a static-heavy audio message, as though recorded in his hidden underground lair). But on the record, Rude chooses not to call in old favors. Instead, he assembles a new list of contacts, all dedicated to the hard-boiled ethics—atmosphere heavy, hooks optional, Wu-Tang reigning over all—of NY orthodoxy. The lean, 10-track ONEderful is a grubby set of blood-in-your-mouth street raps, dusty record scratches and musty, subterranean beats. On “Mr. Goodbar,” Brooklyn-by-way-of-the-Ukraine emcee Your Old Droog flows with the blunted thump of the Kool Genius. Conway the Machine calls out all studio gangsters on the concrete-cold piano keys and tough drum loop of “Andre Drummond.” Elsewhere, “Street Scenes,” featuring Chicago’s Jeremiah Jae, is built on clinking piano keys that recall the Wu’s “C.R.E.A.M.” Roc Marciano gets two tracks—“Murder Paragraphs” and “Triple Black Benz”—because his rasping voice is suited for Rude One’s gritty sound. Almost everything here is sonically consistent, with rapper and producer perfectly in sync; no small thing when it comes to producer compilations that shuffle through guest spots this quickly.The best beat, though, is actually out of step with the rest of the tape. The Mr. Muthafuckin eXquire-featuring “Tyrannosaurs eX” is all swarming ’80s synths and Moroder-style pyrotechnics, hinting at a different direction. The only unequivocal disappointment is “Supreme Trunks.” Conway’s Griselda Gang sibling Westside Gunn has recently established himself as one of NYC’s real emerging talents, but he’s hampered here by a grating keyboard stab that’s impossible to navigate, even with his energetic flow.DJ Rude One succeeds, though, by keeping his focus narrow and his lens firmly fixed. ONEderful is short, snappy and completely disinterested with any kind of traditional song structure. It moves with beat-tape momentum, and has no concerns other than letting its rappers do whatever the hell they want. A low-key release, maybe, but if you just want to just listen to some stalwart rhymes over brass-knuckle beats, Rude One proves an excellent foil.On the same freezing February day in 1968, Wendy Carlos, Suzanne Ciani, and John Mills-Cockell all stopped by Robert Moog's studio to acquire his latest prototype, the Moog Modular synthesizer IIP. And with it, all three trail-blazed new paths for electronic music. Carlos went on to bring the strange synthesized sound into public consciousness with the epochal Switched-On Bach. Ciani went on to use her Moog and Buchla synthesizers in commercials, creating unimaginable sounds that slyly infiltrated the public's subconscious.Mills-Cockell’s contribution to electronic music, though, was a bit harder to parse. That’s changed this year. The first person to have a Moog in Canada, Mills-Cockell used it to heighten the psychedelic weirdness of Intersystems, whose work was compiled earlier this year. A short-lived multimedia ensemble, Intersystems’ installations and be-ins melded abstract visuals, eerie spoken word and otherworldly electronics from Mills-Cockell in a manner that rivaled the sensory overload of Andy Warhol's Exploding Plastic Inevitable. (Mills-Cockell also provided synths for the likes of psych-pop outfit Kensington Market, Bruce Cockburn, and Anne Murray.) Now comes a look at Mills-Cockell's adventurous trio Syrinx, which pitted his Moog against the drums and hand percussion of Alan Wells and the electric saxophone of Doug Pringle. Syrinx released only two albums in the early ’70s before disbanding. And while RVNG’s wont is to plunder and cull unreleased tapes, so singular are these two studio albums that with RVNG's handsome 3xLP set, the label reissued them intact, with a third disc given to unreleased takes and a stunning live document of the trio performing with the Toronto Repertory Ensemble. All but unknown in the US, Syrinx carved out a niche for themselves in Canada, sharing bills with the likes of Miles Davis and Ravi Shankar, while the brief cha-cha whirligig of “Tillicum” became the opening theme for a CTV Network documentary program, “Here Come the Seventies,” embedding its curious mélange of brass and circuitry into viewers’ ears.If the small number of composers and academics who got their hands on the Moog synthesizer wound up defining the early electronic music cannon, even fewer of them integrated the unwieldy instrument in a band or pop music without being labeled a novelty act. Silver Apples and the United States of America might be Syrinx’s closest contemporaries, but there’s a nimbleness and grace to the group that gives the sense of the group dancing beyond the confines of genre. It’s there from their very first number, “Melina’s Torch,” which feels wistful rather than weird. While electronics during this era were often deployed to mimic psychedelic mind states at their most intense and immersive, Mills-Cockell’s use of them instead suggests the contemplative comedown. There’s gentleness and elegance to numbers like “Journey Tree” and “Chant for Your Dragon King” that make for some of the most disarming experimental music of the era.The buzzing sine waves snaking through the uptempo “Appaloosa-Pegasus” suggest that the band could also venture into stranger climes. By the time of 1971’s Long Lost Relatives, they had abandoned the pastoral airs of their debut for a more imposing sound. “Tumblers to the Vault” is an apt title, suggesting a precision and physical prowess you can hear in the songs: Mills-Cockell’s Moog is as luminescent as jumping jack firecrackers while Wells’ hand drums and shook bells do pinwheels around it, all of it capped by Pringle’s sax lines nailing perfect somersaults between the two.The better part of Tumblers is given over to three versions of “December Angel,” a nearly ten-minute journey that appears in studio version, demo and live rendition with an orchestra. Weird squalls introduce the studio version, Mills-Cockell getting his Moog to chime like a celeste. The demo version of the song, on piano, lays bare the melody at the heart of the trio’s music. But the live performance might be the most surprising, with space that allows for violins and bells to swell and sparkle in the firmament. Midway through, you'd be forgiven for thinking that Syrinx wasn't a groundbreaking group using the newfangled Moog to make mutant pop, but rather forward-thinking scholars of Debussy. Beyond being merely Switched On, Syrinx envisioned where electronic music would go decades later, being a pliant thing that at once eluded and embraced other genres, making them into a singular, impressionistic sound. Denver’s Khemmis traffic in longform doom metal, letting their anger spread gradually rather than unleashing it all in one torrent. It’s an unlikely sound to gain wider attention, as it’s resistant to translation and often encourages the depression that’s consistent with its tempos. Where many of their peers double down on Master of Reality worship or tread into more psychedelic or progressive waters (as is the case with Pallbearer, their main contemporary), they elongate the time-worn dual guitar harmonies of Thin Lizzy and Judas Priest, working within a more traditional metal context. Hunted, their second record, sees them making strides in finding their sound, with leads as poignant as their accompanying vocal work.When your band’s vibe derives mainly from the melody, those leads better be solid, and Khemmis’ core, guitarists and vocalists Phil Pendergast and Ben Hutcherson, make the sorrow in their songs downright joyful. Opener “Above the Water” establishes this rule quickly, with jubilant leads that rival Iron Maiden’s sprightly guitar work. They’re not bogged down by Hunted’s overarching gloom; rather, they justify the songs’ weight, serving as a gliding bridge between lumbering cliffs. The ending of “Candlelight” shows how Pendergast and Hutcherson can be tricksters too, by bending what would be a showstopping riff and burying it in the murk. “Beyond the Door” even features a ZZ Top-esque boogie where they sound like Billy Gibbons wandering through a wasteland, the shuffle acting as a last-ditch flare for any sign of life. (Get a Texan in your band—drummer Zach Coleman, who’s also played in cult black metal duos Vasaeleth and Dagon—and that influence is bound to rub off somehow.) Pendergast’s somber war cry carries the music as much as his own guitar work. His pealing tone suggests mightiness, but what shines through is what a toll such power can take. “Three Gates” plays around with how death metal and doom influences combat each other. “Gates” is also a nod to the Peaceville Three—Anathema, My Dying Bride, and Paradise Lost—whose earlier works fused death metal vocals, doom pacing, and a bleak outlook. Khemmis have stripped the cobwebs off those bands’ more Gothic moments and revealed the rock ‘n’ roll heart lurking beneath, and “Gates” is a prime example of how their lack of varnish works in their favor.One doesn't have to be a broken-hearted straight male (or even a Nobel Prize voter) to fall in love with Bob Dylan’s Blood on the Tracks, but it might help. Filled with open-ended and often gender-specific pronouns, the yous, hers, hes, shes, and theys remain unnamed on all but one of the 10 songs on the moody 1975 epic, each a glowing invitation for listeners to fill in the blanks with their own nearest available emotional devastations. Often referred to as Dylan’s “breakup album,” it’s likewise become just that for many listeners, both expressing and absorbing great aloneness. Dylan himself professed confusion about the album’s popularity. “It’s hard for me to relate to that,” he said the year Blood on the Tracks was released. “I mean, people enjoying that kind of pain.”But as plenty have pointed out in the wake of Dylan’s Nobel for Literature, his music is about far more than just his lyrics, and Blood on the Tracks is a prime example of just what that more constitutes. Beyond the emotional wreckage, Blood on the Tracks might be Dylan’s most welcoming LP, its music projecting an undeniable warmth. The disc-opening “Tangled Up in Blue” uncorks the feels via an experimental narrative that fights conventional linearity, but the reasons to keep listening are contained in the first 11 seconds of forward motion before Dylan’s voice enters. Only after that do lyrics even matter, and (on Blood on the Tracks, anyway) he is pretty fantastic at both.Blood on the Tracks is pleasing and complete enough to visit repeatedly, until the syllables become words, the words resolve into meanings, and all of it becomes internalized, a space accessible even without the presence of the album. Perhaps the least dated of Dylan’s recordings, there is a nakedness to everything. Untainted by the politics and cool of the ’60s or the gated drums and overdubbed productions of the ’80s, Blood on the Tracks hits with the same immediacy in the 21st century as it did in 1975.Just as much as Pink Floyd or any other mid-’70s LP-minded artist, Dylan uses the studio to create and sustain a mood on Blood on the Tracks, and this mood is what survives. Drawing from two sets of sessions and at least three configurations of not-fully-identified musicians to capture a singular batch of songs, the album is a full package of writing, performance, and atmosphere. Withdrawing an early version of the album on the eve of release, musicians from sessions in New York disappeared into the credit of “Eric Weissberg and Deliverance,” and musicians recorded later in Minneapolis received no credit at all. Though he received no separate title on the album itself, it is also the first album on which Dylan himself served as sole producer, assembling musicians on his own, sometimes to confusing effect. While staying within the parameters of folk-rock, Dylan finds a rich array of approaches, moving between the vivid brightness of “Tangled Up in Blue” and “You’re Gonna Make Me Lonesome When You Go,” the soft-voiced late-night guitar/bass duets of “Shelter From the Storm” and “Buckets of Rain,” and the pained autumnal crispness of “Idiot Wind.” “Nobody sings Dylan like Dylan” ran one of Columbia Records’ ’60s advertising campaigns, but by the early ’70s consumers were deluged with multiple generations of New Dylans, each expanding from territory that once belonged almost exclusively to Dylan, from Joni Mitchell to Bruce Springsteen, Leonard Cohen to Patti Smith. After a few years in the wilderness, when Dylan recorded for David Geffen’s Asylum Records (and Columbia released Dylan, scraping up unissued sessions without his consent), Blood on the Tracks might be seen as Dylan’s own assertion that nobody wrote Dylan like Dylan, either. For fans at the time, it was a revelation, both a few notches less cryptic than his ’60s surrealism, but no less mystical, folding in techniques of his old finger-pointin’ (“Idiot Wind”), blues-strummin’ (“Meet Me in the Morning”), vision-havin’ (“Shelter From the Storm”), and story-tellin’ (“Lily, Rosemary, and the Jack of Hearts”) self, all while tapping into powerful new realms of vulnerability.As a writer, Dylan had been through about three lightly overlapping phases over the previous 15 years—young and Woody (1960-1963), young and visionary (1964-1968), and young and happy (1969-1973), and Blood on the Tracks built on them while promising something more. Officially retired and raising children during the early ’70s, Dylan had deliberately downshifted into a less complex lyric style beginning with 1969’s Nashville Skyline, in part hoping to shake some of the obsessive global audience he’d attracted. New Morning and other country-pop sessions from the period found Dylan playing with some of the brighter textures he would employ on Blood on the Tracks, but his reluctance to write in the symbolism-laden voice of his earliest years soon resulted in a period when he “more or less had amnesia,” as he later told an interviewer. Returning to active songwriting in 1973 and the road in 1974 with the Band for Planet Waves, many of his latest songs seemed to lack the all-seeing perspective of his earlier work.Dylan would say Blood on the Tracks was influenced by lecture classes he took with painter Norman Raeben in New York in early 1974. “You’ve got yesterday, today, and tomorrow all in the same room,” he said of the new lyric writing approach that resulted. Heard most vividly in the long-arc narratives of “Tangled Up in Blue” and “Simple Twist of Fate,” verses and lines present images like shuffled postcards connected by what Dylan referred to as a “code.” It is here that thinking of Blood on the Tracks as a “breakup album” becomes reductive, missing out on much of what the collection of songs has to offer, the “breakup” as much a concept as the bandshell concert loosely framing Sgt. Pepper’s. Just as much as relationships are about more than their breakups, breakup albums are about more than their relationships.Though the disintegration of Dylan’s marriage might easily be spotted in nearly every song on the album, there are also meditations on the ineffable passage of time (“Tangled Up in Blue”), a transitory love affair in the present tense (“You’re Gonna Make Me Lonesome When You Go”) and media jackyldom and other bummers (“Idiot Wind”). For that matter, a full third of the LP’s second side is concerned with “Lily, Rosemary, and the Jack of Hearts,” a nine-minute 16-verse ballad that bucks the album’s signature themes of time regained, implacable loves, and unnamed names. Though remaining convincingly jaunty throughout with a light melody that catches the details in forensic clarity, its drawn-out story is a chore to decipher. Unlike the ambient emotional narratives of the rest of the album, the linear ballad requires a full and present attention, a reminder of one of the ways that music consumption is different than reading. Reportedly once considered for a film adaptation, the screen may’ve suited its stage-directed characters better than folk-rock. Further separating it from the rest, the blood spilled on this particular track doesn’t seem to be Dylan’s own, detracting from the album’s bigger picture and only underscoring the unifying power of the other nine songs.Drawing on a range of songwriting tricks (including an open “E” tuning that assures that very few will play Dylan like Dylan, either), Blood on the Tracks emphasizes a feeling of raw expression. Singing live in the studio (with the exception of the overdubbed “Meet Me in the Morning”), Dylan placed his usual focus on capturing in-the-moment performances. And though his reputation for studio and onstage spontaneity is well-deserved, Blood on the Tracks also presents songs that he had spent almost all of 1974 writing and reworking. Personal, perhaps, the songs easily transcend their would-be biographies. If Dylan’s attitudes towards his partners sometimes stand out as patronizing—“You’re a Big Girl Now” acting as an equally infantilizing bookend to 1966’s “Just Like a Woman”—they reveal more about the nature of hurt than anything useful about the songwriter.One glimpse into the making of the album comes through the version that Dylan very nearly released, scrapping it at the last moment, after jackets and test pressings had already been made. Playing an advance copy at a family gathering in Minnesota in over the holidays, Dylan—at the behest of his brother—decided he wanted a brighter sound, less of a downer. Flexing his superstar muscle and anticipating Neil Young, Kanye West, and others, he had the album recalled, pulling together a band of local folkies in the days after Christmas 1974 to rerecord half of the songs. The New York acetate (most recently offered in 2015 for $12,000) is all late night atmospherics, mostly just Dylan and bassist Tony Brown, the sound of the former’s coat-buttons brushing against his guitar strings. Though tracks have come out via various box sets, bootlegs of the New York sessions—sourced warmly from the acetate—are every bit as magical as the final product, a classic all its own, minus a clunkier “Lily, Rosemary, the Jack of Hearts.” In Minneapolis, Dylan brightened up the sound (changing keys on “Tangled Up in Blue,” striking a lighter keynote) and toned down some of the crueler lyrics (especially on “If You See Her, Say Hello”). If atmosphere was lost (and it was, especially without the pedal steel-drenched “You’re A Big Girl Now”), then accessibility was gained. Charting at #1 on its January 1975 release, Blood on the Tracks is arguably the last Dylan album on which a majority of the songs became standards of their own, part of the invisible canon shared at coffee houses, college campuses, or anywhere bright-eyed young pickers might congregate. In that way, it is also maybe Dylan’s last album of originals to qualify as “folk music” in both senses of the phrase: the popular genre defined by the presence of idioms and acoustic instruments, but also the great shared body of songs with lives and language that exist apart from their studio recordings and original performers. With the Byrds and many others achieving their own hits with his tunes and Dylan himself often circulating unrecorded work via folk music zines and songwriting demos, this had long been the expected fate of Dylan's songs.Imagining Dylan as a simple songwriter, the template of Blood on the Tracks—sad boy with an acoustic guitar and a handful of chords—might seem basic, until one tries to replicate anything about it, or even just strum the songs at home. Blood on the Tracks lives alone in Dylan’s catalog, that open “E” tuning (which Dylan refused to explain to his musicians) often preventing the songs from sounding exactly right in the hands of others. It lives on in its own peculiar way. Dylan has seemed to keep “Tangled Up In Blue” in particular to himself, rewriting the song several times, both casually (playing fast and loose with the pronouns), and more formally, including a near-total rework released on 1984’s Real Live. One of the few older songs Dylan has performed consistently in recent years, even newer verses have emerged over the past half-decade. Nobody covers Dylan like Dylan either, apparently.Though the albums on either side of Blood on the Tracks both made it to #1 and contained hints of the same songwriting territory, via Planet Waves’ “Going, Going, Gone” and Desire’s “Sara,” especially